USER MANUAL
BIG FIVE PROFILE





This document has been created by the Research and Innovation Department of Central Test and is intended for the internal use of our clients.

It cannot be reproduced, modified in whole or in part by any means without the expressed written consent of Central Test.


Central Test - Member of the International Test Commission
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS






1. INTRODUCTION ...........................................................
3
1.1
WHAT THE TEST TAKER/TEST ADMINISTRATOR WOULD GET? ........
3
1.2	WHAT IT MEASURES? SPECIFICITY AND THEORETICAL	
	BACKGROUND OF THE TEST .......................................................	4




2.
FACTOR DESCRIPTIONS ................................................
5

3.

PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES .........................................

6
3.1	MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION .............................................	6
3.2	RELIABILITY ............................................................................	7
3.3	VALIDITY .................................................................................	7
3.4	SOCIO-CULTURAL CONSIDERATIONS ..........................................	9
	3.4.1	GENDER DIFFERENCES ....................................................	10
	3.4.2	AGE EFFECT ....................................................................	10
 
1.	Introduction

Big Five Profile is designed to measure general personality traits based on the “BIG FIVE” construct of personality. This construct purports the existence of 5 essential traits viz. Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness and Neuroticism, collectively referred as "OCEAN", as the building blocks of personality.

The questionnaire consists of 15 sets of 4 statements in forced choice format, on a 4 points rating scale - 1 for most and 4 for least. The estimated time to complete the test online is 5-7 minutes.


This test gives a global personality profile of the test taker by assessing the relative strength on each of the five major traits. It is recommended for entrance examinations in schools, colleges and institutions; as a screening tool to shortlist candidates for interviews; and as a prelude to feedback sessions in personality development programs.



1.1	What the test taker/test administrator would get?

•	A graphical representation indicating the candidate’s personality on the five behavioral traits.

•	A	detailed	description	of	the	person’s	personality	on	each	trait	with personalised comments.

•	A tabular representation of the result that describes the candidate’s main personality factors and opposing factors.

•	A detailed description including particular strength and weakness of the test taker on the basis of his/her strongest personality trait.












User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 3
 
1.2	What it measures? Specificity and theoretical background of the test

The Big Five Profile is based on the 'Big Five' theory of personality, pioneered in a popular study in the year 1963 by psychologist Warren Norman. The term "Big Five" was coined by Lewis R. Goldberg and was originally associated with studies of personality traits used in a natural language. The test measures what many psychologists consider to be the five fundamental dimensions of personality. However, the test is designed to be used in corporate settings and certain expressions are modified accordingly.


Personality psychologists are primarily interested in knowing two things: what differentiates one person from another, and why we behave the way we do. The Big Five model of personality tries to answer the first question.


The Big Five was originally derived in the 1970's by two independent teams of researchers - Paul Costa and Robert McCrae (at the National Institute of Health), and Warren Norman (at the University of Michigan)/Lewis R. Goldberg (at the University of Oregon) - who took slightly different routes at arriving at the same results: most human personality traits can be boiled down to five broad dimensions of personality, regardless of language or culture. These five dimensions were derived by asking thousands of people, hundreds of questions and then analyzing the data with a statistical procedure known as factor analysis.


It is important to realize that the researchers did not set out to find five dimensions, but that five dimensions emerged from their analyses of data. In scientific circles, the Big Five is now the most widely accepted and used model of personality. The Big Five Profile has gained extreme importance in the corporate world in identifying and in making the best use of a person's skills and inherent qualities.



















User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 4
 
2.	Factor Descriptions


Consciousness of others
This is the tendency to be pleasant and accommodating, gracious and cooperative in social interactions.
High Score
Sensitive, cooperative, empathetic and altruistic, consensual. Influenced by feelings.	Low score
Demanding, Pragmatic, dominant, tenacious, non-accommodating. May lack sensitivity.
Sociability/Dynamism
This is the tendency to be concerned with the outside world and to constantly look for gratification. It deals with enjoying human interactions, being enthusiastic, talkative, confident and sociable. It also deals with taking pleasure in activities that involve large social groups.
High Score
Looks for thrills, energetic and enthusiastic. Likes the company of others and to communicate.	Low Score
Remains calm, focused, subjective and individualistic. A deep thinker and likes quietness.
Emotional Balance
This is the tendency to remain calm and composed and face stressful situations with confidence.
High Score
Lethargic, faces situations with confidence, thoughtful & optimistic. Has a balanced mood and composed disposition.	Low Score
Strong emotional reactivity, inconsistent and extra sensitive to criticism. Has a tendency to be anxious or even depressed.
Meticulousness
This is the tendency to show self-discipline, act dutifully, to aspire achievement and success. It also deals with planning things rather than behaving spontaneously.
High Score
Self-disciplined, critical, methodical, conscious of everything. Prefers planned rather than spontaneous behaviour.	Low Score
Improvises processes, although he/she may be a little disorganized. Impulsive and likes to be guided by his/her intuition.
Openness/Imagination
This is a general appreciation for art, emotion, adventure, original ideas, curiosity and diversity of experiences. It is a tendency to fluctuate with new thoughts, ideas and changes.

High Score
Likes variety, imaginative, sensitive to aesthetics. Has a great curiosity, both for the internal and external world.	
Low Score
Likes what is established and familiar, needs stability. Does not prefer to leave a job unfinished or put off making a decision.




User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 5
 
3.	Psychometric properties

Periodic assessment of sensitivity and fine-tuning the test are crucial for long- term survival and effectiveness of any psychometric test. Like all the other tests developed by Central Test, the Big 5 Profile-English Edition has also been subject to a series of validation studies since its first online publication in May, 2008.


3.1	Mean and Standard Deviation


Factor	Mean	Standard	Standard Error of
		Deviation	Measurement
Consciousness of Others	5.33	1.86	0.95
Sociability/Dynamism	5.24	1.61	0.95
Emotional Balance	4.57	1.74	0.95
Meticulousness	4.72	1.94	0.94
Openness/Imagination	5.17	1.74	0.97
*n=550


It can be seen from this table that mean scores of all the five factors is between
4.	5 and 5.5 and standard deviations is between 1.5 to 2.0; it indicates that findings are close to a normal distribution and thus support the empirical evidence that Big Five factor scores are normally distributed in the population. From an assessment point of view, it provides good evidence that the tool (Big Five Profile-English Edition) is corresponding well with its theoretical assumptions.


# Mean and standard deviation together provide the estimate of a candidate’s position in the population of reference.
# Standard error of measurement provides an estimate of error that can be involved in measurement. Most standard psychometric tests have a standard error of 1.0 to 1.50; the lesser the standard error in comparison to mean score, the greater the accuracy of the test to assess that particular characteristic.









User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 6
 
3.2	Reliability


Factor	No. of	Alpha
	items	Reliability
Consciousness of Others	12	0.74
Sociability/Dynamism	12	0.66
Emotional Balance	12	0.70
Meticulousness	12	0.76
Openness/Imagination	12	0.69
*n=550


In behavioral sciences, an alpha reliability of over .65 is considered to be very good. As we can see from this table, the alpha reliability for all the factors is ranging from 0.66 (Sociability/Dynamism) to 0.76 (Meticulousness). It can further be observed that constructs that are wide and diverse in their conceptualization like sociability/dynamism and openness/imagination (as the meaning from sociability/dynamism and openness/imagination changes to some degree in different contexts) have lower alpha and constructs with relatively narrow definition (e.g. Meticulousness) have a higher alpha. This supports the construct validity of the test.

# Alpha reliability provides an estimate of the variance among the scores on items that can be explained by dimension score.


3.3	Validity

Validity of a psychometric tool may be assessed in a variety of ways and it is always recommended to use multiple methods to examine validity, in order to have a psychometrically sound and practically useful test. In its essence, validity refers to the extent a tool is able to demonstrate that it is measuring what it is supposed to. For example, if a tool claims to measure extraversion it should measure all the facets of extraversion and should not measure anything other than extraversion (to take an analogy from natural science, a thermometer should measure only temperature and not pressure or humidity).










User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 7
 
In the field of psychology, validity of a tool is assessed by various methods depending upon the construct under assessment. Normally, these methods revolve around assessing three distinct qualities:

	Representation of the concept:

It refers to the extent the test items are in agreement with their underlying construct. It was examined by giving the preliminary test items to a group of five experts with factor descriptions of all the five factors. They were asked to put each item in one of the five factors as per their agreement with the factor description. Only items that yielded high consistency across experts were selected for the final questionnaire.

	Criterion validity:

Criterion Validity is the extent to which factor scores indicate correspondence with identified empirical criteria. For example, it is observed that high performing sales people show a high level of sociability and emotional balance and people in maintenance planning have a high level of meticulousness and a low level of openness/imagination.


Empirically verifiable criteria like these were identified and the relationship between these criteria and factor scores was examined. A detailed account of these analyses is beyond the scope of this document, however here is a description of the process followed to examine criterion validity:


A.	Five distinct occupational groups were identified as criterion groups and hypotheses were formed regarding the expected difference among different groups on each factor.


To test these hypotheses, a one-way ANOVA was performed. Most of the groups were having significantly high scores on one or two factors that are thought to be important in performing duties associated with that particular occupation (p<0.005). For example, most successful salespeople were found to have a high score on sociability/dynamism and emotional balance.

Technical Manual and User Guide
VOCATION










Copyright © 2017 by Central Test Ltd., or its affiliate(s)


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photography, recording, or any information stor age and retrieval system, without written permission from Central Test and the authors.


The Central Test logo is a trademark in France, Europe, and/or other countries of Central Test Ltd. or its affiliate(s).
 
Table of Contents
 
Introduction	3
1.	General Description and Applicability	4
1.1.	Main Areas of Application	5
1.2.	Questionnaire Structure	5
1.3.	Mode of Administration, Languages and Special Requirements	6
1.4.	Social Desirability	6
1.5.	Administration Instructions	7
1.6.	Technical and Security Issues	8
1.6.1.	Respecting the Ethical Charter	8
1.6.2.	Confidentiality and Security of User Data	8
1.6.3.	Hardware Architecture and Server Availability	9
1.6.4.	Computer-generated Reports	9
1.7.	Supply, Conditions and Availability	9
2.	Conceptual Framework and Development	10
2.1.	Theoretical Background	10
2.2.	Development of the Test	12
2.2.1.	Factors and Item Construction	12
2.2.2.	Pretests	13
2.2.3.	Factor Definitions	13
2.2.4.	Combined Profiles	17
2.2.5.	Ipsative Response Format	18
2.2.6.	Thurstonian Item Response Theory (IRT) and Ipsative Responses	19
2.2.6.a.	Item Facility	19
2.2.6.b.	Item Difficulty and Discrimination	19
2.2.7.	Pilot Study	20
3.	Scoring	21
3.1.	The relationship between Raw Scores and Norms	21
3.2.	Transforming Raw Scores to Standardised Scores	23
3.5.	Creating In-house Norms	25
3.6.	Link between Scores and Report Comments	25
4.	Sample Descriptives	26
5.	Norms	27
6.	Reliability	34
6.1.	Internal Reliability	34
6.2.	Test-Retest	35
7.	Validity	37
7.1.	Concurrent Validity	37
7.1.1.	The ORVIS IPIP	38
7.2.1.	Inter-factor Correlations	40
7.2.2.	Confirmatory Factor Analysis	41
7.2.3.	Consequential Validity	43
8.	VOCATION and Equal Opportunities	44
8.1.	Measurement Equivalence	44
8.1.1.	Differential Item Functioning (DIF)	45
8.1.1.a.	DIF Analysis: Gender	47
8.1.1.b.	DIF Analysis: Age	48
8.1.1.c.	T-tests and ANOVAs	49
9.	Additional Information and Considerations	55
9.1.	Interpreting Scores	55
9.2.	Organisational Need: Career selection, Recruitment, and Development	56
References	58
 
Introduction
VOCATION is a career interest assessment tool designed to analyse the occupational and vocational preferences of individuals. Based on John Holland’s (1959) model of occupational interests (Holland Occupational Themes), VOCATION provides the user with an informative evaluation of the occupational areas that suit their interests.
VOCATION is an updated version of Central Test’s Occupational Interest Inventory-R. This new version includes various benefits such as:
●	More contemporary questions reflecting modern day vocations and fields
●	Short and easy-to-understand questionnaire
●	More situational questions
●	Average completion time of 8 minutes
●	Ipsative scaling to guard against social desirability and impression management
●	Developed using state-of-the-art psychometric techniques such as Thurstonian Item Response Theory
●	Practical and easy-to understand reports
●	Contemporary 3 factor combination profiles
In this manual and user guide you will find useful information about the questionnaire development, theoretical background, psychometric properties and practical applications.

Chapters 1, 2, 3 and 8 are specifically tailored for HR practitioners, while Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 comprise of detailed technical and psychometric information.
 
1.	General Description and Applicability
VOCATION maps out the test-taker’s career interests across six major factors. Given below are the
definitions for each factor.
Realistic
Individuals with "realistic" interests tend to like physical and/or manual activities. Driven by concrete results, they are drawn to tasks that require great dexterity and physical endurance, and as a result are likely to enjoy outdoor activities or those that involve working manually with their hands, such as fixing and assembling objects.
Investigative
This factor corresponds to individuals that enjoy investigating theoretical knowledge. They like to solve problems, conduct surveys and research information in order to better understand a subject or the environment around them.
Artistic
Those with an interest in “artistic” activities are likely to want to express themselves through creative means such as music, drawing and art. They tend to be interested in activities that allow them to be intuitive and imaginative, and may not enjoy being part of projects that are too conventional, with strict methods that allow for little improvisation.
Social
Individuals with an interest in “social” activities like to be around people, communicating with and/or helping them wherever possible. They may have a preference for activities that allow them to meet new people and to have a certain sense of community or of being part of a group.
Enterprising
Individuals with an interest in "enterprising" activities tend to enjoy tasks that involve an aspect of risk-taking and influencing others. They may enjoy having to persuade others of their ideas and/or leading or managing people. They are also likely to be dynamic and take initiatives.
Conventional
Individuals with an interest in “conventional” activities have a preference for conducting work in an orderly and meticulous fashion. They are likely to want to stick to a certain structure in the tasks that they undertake and to be organised. They are likely to enjoy tasks that require precision and attention to detail and that relate to dealing with numerical data.
 
1.1.	Main Areas of Application
VOCATION was specifically intended for HR professionals and career counsellors, and designed to be used internationally. It can be used for career counselling, career development, mentoring and coaching. Table 1 below details the different uses of VOCATION:
Table 1. The different uses of VOCATION.

Career Counselling	Career Development	Mentoring/Coaching
To help students, trainees,
recent university graduates and early career
professionals choose a career path	To help professionals
explore new occupational avenues and expand their
skill-base (horizontal career development)	
To understand the vocational interests of the mentee/coachee and guide them in their career

VOCATION can be combined with other personality questionnaires such as Central Test‘s Professional Profile-2 and Sales Profile-R in order to acquire a more precise and comprehensive profile of the individual. Table 2 below gives two examples of how VOCATION can be used with Professional Profile 2 and Sales Profile-R. However, VOCATION can also be applied with other assessments, as displayed below in Table 2.
Table 2. Possible applications of VOCATION with other assessments.

Additional test	Objectives	Advantages

Professional Profile 2	
Career orientation	In-depth information about interest and personality fit tailored for a specific career

Sales Profile-R	
Career development	Match interest in sales-related jobs with requisite skills

1.2.	Questionnaire Structure
Format
Unlike traditional questionnaire-based career interest inventories, questions in VOCATION are presented in a forced choice format whereby respondents select the answer that best represents their preference from two listed options. This forces respondents to select the option that is most appealing to them. Forced-choice formats reduce response bias (Chan, 2003; ten Holt, van Duijn & Boomsma, 2010), susceptibility to impression management (Baron, 1996; Bartram, 2007) and are generally more difficult to fake (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011). Forced-choice formats make it impossible to provide the same response on all items thereby resulting in greater differentiation of scores within a profile (Cruise, 2011/2012). Recruiters, career counsellors and HR practitioners can therefore be confident that responses are more accurate representations of individual work preferences.
 
Questions
The questionnaire consists of 60 questions that measure 6 factors and 12 facets. All questions must be answered in order for respondents to progress to the next stage of the assessment. Shown below is a sample question.


1.3.	Mode of Administration, Languages and Special Requirements
VOCATION is administered online and works with all modern computer operating systems including Windows, MAC-OS and Linux. A PDF version of the questionnaire is available, if required.

Like other modern questionnaires, the assessment can be administered remotely and without supervision. However, should standardised group assessments be required, this can easily be accommodated. Reports are solely generated online. Therefore, if the test has been administered in paper-format, an administrator must manually enter candidate responses into the online platform of the questionnaire to generate candidate reports.
The questionnaire is currently available in English and will soon be available in other languages. For more information on language availability please contact the Central Test Consulting Service (consulting@centraltest.com).
VOCATION was designed to be easily used by individuals from diverse backgrounds and by those with a range of special needs. All test-takers are able to adjust visual screen specifications based on individual requirements. For example, respondents with visual impairments or those requiring a larger font size for comfort, may increase the font size by enlarging the computer screen‘s display (by pressing "CTRL" and "+"). Similarly, respondents are able to access test instructions throughout the course of the assessment. It is also possible to navigate through questions or change answers as desired by selecting on-screen prompts. Alternatively, for blind candidates or those with severe visual disabilities, items may be read aloud by a trained administrator. Individuals with hearing impairments are not excluded from taking the questionnaire since all content is presented visually. Although the average time for completion is 8 minutes, VOCATION has no time limit. Therefore, individuals with learning disabilities are able to take the time they need. Administrators are encouraged to consider whether a candidate who needed an unusual amount of time to take the test may have special needs. Please contact the test publisher for guidance on administering the questionnaire to individuals or groups with special requirements.
1.4.	Social Desirability
Social desirability is the tendency to present oneself in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others. When done unintentionally, it is referred to as self-deception. When done intentionally, it is referred to as impression management (Tett & Simonet, 2011). As people are social by nature, they
 
are generally inclined to seek some degree of social acceptance. Unlike aptitude tests, the results of questionnaires like VOCATION are affected by impression management. An individual‘s attempt to present himself/herself in a favourable light negatively impacts test results, whether the questionnaire is completed online or in paper-based format (Dodou & de Winter, 2014).

Candidates are usually tempted to answer in a way that would impress the recruiter even though there is no right or wrong answer. Candidates may provide responses according to what they feel others may expect to fulfil a role. As a result, social desirability is a significant risk to the validity of assessments (Mueller-Hanson, Heggestad, & Thornton III, 2003). If social desirability was equivalent across all candidates, then test administrators would be able to factor it into the scoring and interpretation of results. However, faking differs across individuals, resulting in distortion of scores.
VOCATION actively guards against social desirability with the use of an ipsative (forced choice) questionnaire format. Research has found ipsative measures to be more resistant to distorted responding compared to more commonly used Likert-scales (Bowen, Martin, & Hunt, 2002; Kluger, Reilly, & Russell, 1991). Not only does the ipsative format reduce the candidate's’ ability to inflate their scores, but items are also combined in such a manner that makes it difficult for candidates to conceive a response strategy, as items are paired with equally appealing response options.
1.5.	Administration Instructions
In most cases the assessment will be taken remotely through online access, and without supervision. However, in the case of taking the assessment within a supervised setting, the following guidelines should be applied.
Although instructions for completing VOCATION are presented on-screen, it is important that administrators communicate with the candidates. Prior to starting the assessment, instructions should be read aloud by the administrator, and candidates should be given the opportunity to ask questions before taking the assessment. Administrators should verify that candidates understand what they are required to do prior to starting the assessment.
Test instructions are the same for every individual. Standardised instructions ensure that all participants are exposed to similar conditions during the assessment process, to ensure that it is fair and objective, and that assessment conditions do not directly or indirectly give any individual or group an advantage.
Further tips:
●	If candidates have questions after the assessment session has begun, the administrator should try to answer them without disturbing other candidates.
●	If a candidate does not understand a question, the administrator should answer carefully and avoid explaining the meaning of words or questions in his/her own words in order to not influence the candidate.
●	If an administrator suspects that a candidate‘s lack of understanding is due to their
education level, the assessment should be stopped.
●	If an administrator suspects that a candidate‘s lack of understanding is due to language
proficiency, the administrator should ask the candidate to take the assessment in the
 
language they are most comfortable with.
●	If an administrator suspects that a candidate is being over cautious when responding, the candidate should be encouraged to endorse their most truthful response.

Candidates receive a notification to take the questionnaire via e-mail with an embedded web link and login details. Web links to the questionnaire are password protected and unique to the candidate‘s account. It is possible to set expiration dates in order to ensure that candidates complete the questionnaire within the specified time-frame. It is possible to configure the invitation in the way that the assessment must be completed at the same IP address once the questionnaire has been accessed from a particular IP address.
VOCATION has no time restriction. However, candidates generally take about 8 minutes to complete the questionnaire. For monitoring purposes, completion times are recorded to allow administrators to see if a candidate rushed through the questionnaire or needed an unusual amount of time to complete the test. Candidates are encouraged to answer questions spontaneously, without rushing, in order to avoid spending too much time thinking about each statement; there are is right or wrong answer.
1.6.	Technical and Security Issues
This chapter details guidelines governing the security of administering VOCATION. These guidelines ensure that every administration of VOCATION is a pleasant, objective and fair process. Security specifications ensure that candidate information is protected both during administration and after assessment completion.
1.6.1.	Respecting the Ethical Charter
As a publisher of online assessment tools, Central Test respects the legal conventions of French Labour Law and the regulatory provisions resulting from the law of 6 January 1978 pertaining to information technology, files and freedoms: Declaration N°1834067.
Test results may not be forwarded to a third person without the explicit consent of the test candidate. A candidate has the right to access their results.
The assessor must grant them access automatically or when the candidate requests it.
The candidate has the right to request that all his/her personal data be permanently deleted. To do this, s/he must contact either the organisation or Central Test directly, who will delete his/her data.
1.6.2.	Confidentiality and Security of User Data
Central Test guarantees the security and confidentiality of data generated during the administration of online tests. Access codes are encrypted in the database and cannot be accessed by anyone.
Passwords are computationally generated and are not visible to companies. A URL rewriting module (secure link generator) is installed and has transparent parameter passing for the user.
Browsing and data exchange via the Central Test application can be secured and encrypted using SSL. Secure browsing is guaranteed by the https protocol, which is represented by an icon in the
 
form of a padlock in the internet browser. The Central Test application has a « GeoTrust SSL True BusinessID » digital signature, issued and certified by GeoTrust©. This certificate is irrefutable evidence of our serious attitude towards security and protects all Central Test assessments from phishing attacks. Invitations to take tests are made via secure links that are of limited use (in terms of numbers and duration). The tests are timed and IP addresses are tracked. Access to questionnaires may be limited in terms of numbers and duration.
1.6.3.	Hardware Architecture and Server Availability
Central Test’s architecture consists of a network of 10 physical dedicated servers providing high- quality service.
Each server is housed in a specialised data centre featuring:
●	Dedicated lines
●	A guaranteed bandwidth of 100Mbps (per server)
●	Redundant energy sources
●	4-hour Equipment Restoration time
●	2-hour Incident Intervention time
●	Monitoring and assistance 24/7/365
Access to the server administration is restricted to an IP address and is password-secured. Data exchanges are secure.
Central Test’s application has been tested on and is compatible with the following browsers:
●	Internet Explorer 8 or above
●	Firefox 21 or above
●	Google Chrome 30 or above
●	Safari 7 or above
1.6.4.	Computer-generated Reports
Reports can be generated within minutes of candidates completing the questionnaire. VOCATION report is user friendly and customisable. Report content can be tailored depending on the needs of the administrator. Separate reports may be configured for the candidate and the company, recruiter, coach or psychologist. Reports are available in PDF format.
1.7.	Supply, Conditions and Availability
Conditions of supply and availability for VOCATION vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply:
●	VOCATION is only available for Psychologists, HR practitioners and coaches.
●	Training is compulsory prior to use and distribution.
 
●	This manual is available to individuals who have been trained to use VOCATION.
●	VOCATION can be ordered online, or by contacting any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide (customer@centraltest.com).
●	For information on VOCATION prices and related products and services, contact any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide.
●	For more information on the training, please contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central Test's partners.

2.	Conceptual Framework and Development
2.1.	Theoretical Background
John Holland’s Model
The Holland Typology, also known as the RIASEC Model, was developed by Holland (1959) and is based on his theory that a person’s vocational interest or career choice is determined by underlying “personality types”. The model is popular because of its practical applicability, simple structure, and availability in order to assess career interests.
Although every individual is complex, Holland (1977) believes that everyone can be easily categorised into 6 basic personality types or a combination of the 6 types – Doers, Thinkers, Creators, Helpers, Persuaders, and Organizers. Holland (1997) hypothesised that an individual’s career choice is an expression of his personality, and that the RIASEC Model can also be used to identify appropriate work environments (Gottfredson, 1999).
Holland (1959) developed his theory throughout his career, starting in the 1950’s when he enrolled in the army to serve as a psychological assistant. Nauta (2010) proposed that many of Holland’s ideas for his theory are a result of his graduate training and the frustrations he experienced when providing career counselling services. Nauta (2010) also states that when Holland was serving in the army, he realised that people fall into categorical vocational personalitytypes. Holland observed army recruits being classified based on the results of an interview, and this is when the idea to sort individuals into set psychological types struck him (Nauta, 2010).
Holland, being experienced in the field of career counselling, began to notice the setbacks of the career tests available at that time. Most of these tests consisted of long scoring items and there was no set list of occupations that could be matched with the results of the assessments. This led Holland (1985) to design the Vocational Preference Inventory (VPI).
Holland continued to work on his theory for the next few years. He also published the Self-Directed Search in 1970, which has since undergone four revisions. Holland also published the Occupations Finder (1977), which is an occupational classification system. Although Holland retired in 1980, he continued to work on his theory. In 1997, he revised it again and added an environmental identity
 
aspect to it (Staff, 2008).
Based on six personality types, Holland developed the RIASEC Model. RIASEC is an acronym for Realistic (Doers), Investigative (Thinkers), Artistic (Creators), Social (Helpers), Enterprising (Persuaders) and Conventional (Organizers). Each type is characterised by a constellation of interests, preferred activities, beliefs, abilities, values, and characteristics (Nauta, 2010).
According to Nauta (2010), Holland stressed upon the fact that most people look for a work environment that allows them to use the skills and abilities that they possess, and take on roles that they are comfortable with.
Holland’s theory is widely accepted and is instrumental in bringing about a radical paradigm shift in the measurement of career-related decisions, satisfaction and stability of work (Bullock, Andrews and Braud, 2010).



Links between the RIASEC dimensions and personality traits
Figure 1. The structural framework of Holland’s (1977) RIASEC Modelof Occupational Themes
represented as a hexagon.
A significant amount of research has been conducted on the possible relationship between the RIASEC dimensions, and personality traits. Larson, Rottinghaus and Borgen (2002) conducted a meta- analysis on the relationship between Holland’s RIASEC dimensions and the Big Five Personality factors (consisting of Openness, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness and Neuroticism), (Costa & McCrae, 1992). They found that there were significant correlations for men and women between the Artistic dimension and ‘Openness’ from the Big Five, Enterprising and ‘Extraversion,’ Social and ‘Extraversion,’ Investigative and ‘Openness,’ as well as Social and ‘Agreeableness.’ Barrick
 
et al (2003) also found support for these relationships, as well as a further overlap between Conventional and ‘Conscientiousness’ and Social and ‘Agreeableness.’ However, research does not appear to show any correlation between the RIASEC Model and Neuroticism (Schinka, Dye, & Curtiss, 1997).
This research suggests that it is possible to infer occupational interests from the personality traits of an individual, and therefore that it may be possible to assume personality traits from one’s occupational interests. However, research would suggest that occupational interests are more predictive of choice of employment than personality is (Fruyt & Mervielde, 1999), which can in turn be an accurate predictor of workplace success (Iddekinge, Putka, Roth, & Lanivich, 2011).
Sub-division of the RIASEC factors
Research has found that there are considerable differences between aspects within each dimension of Holland’s RIASEC model (1958). The six factors; Realistic, Investigative, Artistic, Social, Enterprising and Conventional are broad, and considering the complexity of modern day occupational fields, perhaps should be simplified or subdivided in order to represent a larger range of individual differences. Dingemanse, Van Amstel, De Fruyt, & Wille (2007) further explored the idea that there should be more separation within RIASEC types rather than just between them. They created the Career Insight Questionnaire (CIQ), in which they constructed 15 “building blocks of the Holl and
types” (Dingemanse, Van Amstel, De Fruyt & Wille, 2015, p237) from the original six factor RIASEC
model. For example, Realistic was sub-divided into ‘Handcraft,’ ‘Outdoor,’ and ‘Mechanics/Construction,’ and Investigative was sub-divided into ‘Science’ and ‘Theory.’ Then
comparing their factors with Costa and McCrae’s Big Five personality traits, Dingemanse et al (2015) found that correlations between personality traits from the Big Five were not consistent across aspects of each of the RIASEC factors, when sub-divided. For example, a negative correlation was found between Agreeableness and Holland’s Investigative factor, but only for the scientific component of this factor, suggesting that an individual who scores highly on agreeableness, may have an interest in only part of Holland’s ‘I’ interest.
Based on this research, it was decided that splitting each of the RIASEC factors into two parts for VOCATION would yield a more accurate representation of the range of existing occupational interests. Further details of these subdivisions can be found in Chapter 2.2.3. ‘Factor Definitions’.
2.2.	Development of the Test
VOCATION was developed from a thorough multi-stage process. The precursor to the questionnaire (Occupational Interest Inventory-R) was first developed in 2006. Questionnaire items and factors have been updated in order to ensure a) that items reflect contemporary ways of working, b) effective prevention of faking and social bias, c) that practitioners have a tool that improves the accuracy of assessment decisions and d) that individuals are clearly guided when assessing fit with desired roles and careers. As well as these aspects, throughout the revision of this assessment, it was made sure that the structure of factors and items met the highest standards of reliability and validity.
2.2.1.	Factors and Item Construction
 
VOCATION was developed from the bank of items used from the original Occupational Interest Inventory-R questionnaire. The original questionnaire was reviewed in three major steps:
1.	Feedback was collected from client interviews and training workshop feedback forms in order to be able to ensure that the questionnaire and the factors measured meet their needs.
2.	A panel of experts consisting of psychometricians and researchers then reviewed the items
for face validity purposes and to give their expert opinion.
3.	The questionnaire was pretested six times with a large and representative sample of people. Results were analysed and items were removed and/or changed based on their psychometric qualities, in order to achieve the best reliability and validity.
All changes were made in order to ensure that all aspects of VOCATION accurately measure contemporary occupational domains and interests. Items were checked for cultural bias, clarity and accuracy. Two examples of changed items resulting from this process are depicted in Table 3 below.


Table 3. Examples of changed items resulting from review and feedback.

Factor, Facet	Original Item	VOCATION
Artistic, A1	Assist with writing the script.	Express yourself through the
writing of a script.
Enterprising, E2	Floor manager, ensuring the
smooth running of the
channel.	Ensuring that the teams are
working efficiently.


2.2.2.	Pretests
Pretests were conducted with a range of male and female professionals across the globe to ensure that items were accurate, relevant, clear, concise, culture-free, bias-free and reflected targeted work behaviours. After six English pretests, the final questionnaire was piloted with 309 English-speaking professionals from the United Kingdom. Pretest samples comprised of native English speakers from different continents in order to establish the questionnaire as an international measure of occupational interests.
Upon collection of pretest data, composite reliabilities for each dimension were calculated from generated item factor loadings. Factors were flagged if reliabilities were less than 0.55. Factors that did not converge were inspected for poorly-performing items which were then reviewed, modified or changed and then subjected to another round of pretest.
2.2.3.	Factor Definitions
In light of the findings that the RIASEC factors are rather broad and should be further split up, as discussed in Chapter 2.1., VOCATION comprises of the original six factors, but each divided into two
 
further facets.
On the test user’s report, each factor is presented with a short indication of the personality traits, values, potential aptitudes, learning style and environment that may be endorsed for the individual, based on his/her significant interest in the factor. The personality aspects were developed using Holland’s (1985) research, as well as further research conducted on the relationship between personality traits and the RIASEC model, as discussed in Chapter 2.1. The values associated with each factor signify the values which may be of importance to the individual. The potential aptitudes are the possible skills that the individual may hold. Learning style relates to the method of learning which may be most beneficial to the individual when taking in and comprehending new information. The environment then relates to the style of work environment that is likely to suit the individual, based on his/her interests.
The definitions for each factor, as well as their facet definitions and the additional information related to personality aspects, values, potential aptitudes, learning style and environment, are presented below.



Realistic
Individuals with "realistic" interests tend to like physical and/or manual activities. Driven by concrete results, they are drawn to tasks that require great dexterity and physical endurance, and as a result are likely to enjoy outdoor activities or those that involve working manually with the hands, such as fixing and assembling objects. This factor is divided into R1 and R2, as below:

(R1) Physical & Outdoor Activities: Refers to the desire to engage in physical activities and work outside of an office space and/or confined area.

(R2) Manual & Technical Interests: Refers to the desire to make concrete objects, and to engage in activities that involve manual work and/or the use of machinery.

Personality - Tough, genuine, natural and practical.

Values - Common sense, pragmatism and effort.

Potential aptitudes - Dexterity, comfortable with technical tasks, mechanical intelligence and physical stamina.

Learning style - A concrete and practical approach, where information is learnt through applying examples.
Environment - Most comfortable in environments which allow them to obtain concrete results, to use technical equipment or to work on-site. They tend to dislike being confined to indoor areas such as an office.
 
 

Investigative
This factor corresponds to individuals that enjoy investigating theoretical knowledge. They like to solve problems, conduct surveys and research information in order to better understand a subject or the environment around them. This factor encompasses both I1 and I2, as shown below:


(I1) Intellectual Curiosity & Learning: Refers to the preference for activities that require critical thinking and the desire to gain knowledge.

(I2) Science & Technology: Refers to an interest towards science and new technologies, as well as the desire to investigate and research such topics.

Personality - Curious about everything, and constantly seeking to learn about and understand their environment. They are often precise, intellectual and have a scientific mindset.

Values - Intellectual curiosity, critical thinking and logic.

Potential aptitudes - Research, logical reasoning, learning and analytical capabilities.

Learning style - Best suited to an approach that uses theoretical and systematic research. Environment - Most comfortable in thought-oriented environments that favour expertise over productivity.



Artistic
Those with an interest in "artistic" activities are likely to want to express themselves through creative means such as music, drawing and art. They may feel the need to express their ideas and feelings in this way, and want the independence to do so. They tend to be interested in activities that permit them to be intuitive and imaginative, and may not have a desire to be a part of projects that are too conventional, with strict methods that allow for little improvisation. This factor is divided into A1 and A2, as below:

(A1) Aesthetic Sense & Expression: Refers to an interest in activities that require artistic sensitivity
and expressing one’s emotions in different forms.

(A2) Creativity & Design: Refers to a preference to conceive, imagine and innovate.

Personality - Intuitive, creative, idealistic and independent. Sensitive and attuned to art and aesthetics.

Values - An eye for beauty, originality, imagination and freedom.
 
Potential aptitudes - Originality, imagination and the ability to 'think outside of the box'/innovate.

Learning style - Best suited to a method that involves creativity, intuition, communicating through art, words, speech and visualising/conceptualising ideas.

Environment - Comfortable in environments that promote the expression of ideas and creativity, and where methods are not overly defined or structured.



Social
Individuals with an interest in "social" activities like to be around people, communicating with and/or helping them wherever possible. They may have a preference for meeting new people, as well as feeling a sense of co-operation or being part of a group. Furthermore, they are likely to want to be able to express themselves, as well as patiently listen to, and be attentive to, the needs of others. This factor encompasses both S1 and S2, as below:

(S1) Dedication to Others: Refers to a desire to help others, listen, inform, train, give advice and be helpful to the community.

(S2) Personal Relationships: Refers to a preference to be in contact with other people, explain, counsel and communicate with clients or co-workers.

Personality - Patient, understanding and attentive to others. They also tend to be kind, warm and welcoming.
Values - Altruism, cooperation and generosity.

Potential aptitudes - Empathy, listening and communication.

Learning style - Learn by sharing with others and by working as a team.

Environment - Comfortable in social environments that encourage personal contact, collaboration and communication.


Enterprising
Individuals with an interest in "enterprising" activities tend to enjoy tasks that involve an aspect of risk-taking and influencing others. They may enjoy selling and persuading others of their ideas and/or leading or managing others. They are also likely to enjoy communicating with others and taking initiatives. This factor is divided into E1 and E2, as below:

(E1) Enterprising: Refers to an inclination to develop new activities, materialise ideas or projects, take risks and manage difficult situations.

(E2) Leadership: Refers to the desire to encourage, motivate and manage or lead a team/other
 
people.

Personality - Open, dynamic, assertive and entrepreneurial.

Values - Taking risks, status and competition.

Potential aptitudes - Take initiatives, lead and motivate others.

Learning style - Learn by doing and physically taking part in the type of situation that they are learning about.

Environment - Comfortable in competitive environments where they can take risks and push themselves out of their comfort zone in order to move up quickly.



Conventional
Individuals with an interest in "conventional" activities have a preference for conducting work in an orderly and meticulous fashion. They are likely to want to stick to a certain structure in the tasks that they undertake, to be organised and efficient with their time. They may as a result pay attention to small details, and be inclined towards projects involving numerical aspects, which would require such a precise approach. This factor is divided into C1 and C2, as below:

(C1) Methodical: Refers to the preference to organise, plan tasks, rigorously apply methods or rules, and control quality or structure.

(C2) Interest in Data and Numbers: Refers to the interest that an individual has to reason with numbers, analyse statistical data and informatics, as well as understand the laws of mathematics. Personality - Meticulous, self-controlled, careful and stable.

Values - Accuracy, stability and efficiency.

Potential aptitudes - Organisation, data analysis, attention to detail and ability to work with numbers.

Learning style - Learn by following rules, instructions and established procedures.

Environment - Comfortable in structured and hierarchical environments where rules and procedures are clearly defined.


2.2.4.	Combined Profiles
To date, most RIASEC tools derive individuals’ occupational interest profiles by identifying their two or three main interests out of the 6 RIASEC factors, and combining them to explain which field or occupation is likely to interest the person. Holland himself noted the importance of using factor
 
combinations, stating in his Self Directed Search tool (1979), which uses a three factor combination, that it is vital for the user to consider all the possible variations of the three factor combination. This suggests that an individual’s occupational interests profile should not be inferred from their level of interest on one of the RIASEC factors alone.
In support of using the combination of several RIASEC factors to derive an individual's occupational interests profile, research has found that there is a large amount of overlap between the six RIASEC factors and personality. For example, Barrick et al (2003) and Larson, Rottinghaus and Borgen (2002) found a significant relationship between extraversion and both the Enterprising and Social factors of Holland’s model. This suggests that, due to the complexity of personality, individuals are likely to be interested in multiple RIASEC factors.
In light of this, VOCATION reports derive an individual’s occupational interests profile from the combination of their two highest interests (calculated at an equal level of significance) and their third highest interest (calculated at a slightly lower level of significance than the first two), and in turn present a list of possible appropriate trades. Using a combination of the three main factors allows for a more accurate and precise measurement of the occupations that individuals are likely to be interested in. Furthermore, keeping the third highest interest at a slightly lower level of significance allows for a more realistic view of the individual’s occupational profiles, and leaves room for individuals to focus on their two main interests alone, in case they do not identify well with their third highest interest.
2.2.5.	Ipsative Response Format
Response options for the items in VOCATION are written in binary forced-choice format (FC). FC format items ask that respondents make comparative judgements by endorsing statements as ‘most like me’ or ‘least like me’, and have been shown to overcome many of the limitations associated with Likert-scale items (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011a; Chan, 2003; Saville & Willson, 1991; ten Holt, van Duijn, & Boomsma, 2010). The advantages of using FC items include:
•	Removal of response biases, such as the tendency to agree with all items (acquiescence bias)
•	Reduced impression management and faking
•	More powerful intra-person comparisons
Despite the advantages of using forced choice items in questionnaires, they have been underutilised due to the nature of the data such questionnaires produce. These data are ‘ipsative’, meaning that the sum of individuals’ scores remains constant. Historically, Classical Test Theory (CTT) has been considered inadequate for the scoring and validation of ipsative data (Cornwell & Dunlap, 1994; Loo, 1999; Meade, 2004), because:
•	The relative nature of scores means that comparisons between individuals can be difficult.
•	The linear dependency of scores distorts the construct validity of the scales.
•	The lack of variance distorts correlations with external criteria.
•	Assumptions required for traditional reliability estimates are violated.
 
2.2.6.	Thurstonian Item Response Theory (IRT) and Ipsative Responses
Contemporary analysis techniques, developed by Brown and Maydeu-Olivares (2011, 2013), have allowed for the reliable use of FC items in questionnaire development. Using a combination of Item Response Theory (IRT) methodologies and Thurstonian comparison models (Thursto ne, 1927; 1931), Brown & Maydeu-Olivares showed that the previous issues in the interpretation of ipsative data were able to be overcome, for example:

•	‘Absolute’ values could be obtained, allowing for meaningful comparisons between individuals.
•	Distortions that lead to issues in validity can be corrected.
Despite their potential benefits, Thurstonian models were not previously used in the analysis of ipsative data for the following reasons (Brown, 2010):

•	There was no efficient estimation method available.
•	Computer technology was not powerful enough to facilitate analysis.
•	Previous statistical programmes did not facilitate the calculation of scores because the variance of
error for each question is 0.
For VOCATION, Thurstonian IRT was used to revise, rewrite and validate both items and factors. Figure 2 displays the model of Thurstonian IRT used to analyse items and factors on the questionnaire.



Figure 2. Modelof Thurstonian IRT analyses utilised in the development of VOCATION.


2.2.6.a.	Item Facility
Item facility refers to an item’s ability to differentiate between respondents and identify floor or ceiling effects. An item has floor or ceiling effects when the probability of endorsing a response option is much lower or greater than the probability of endorsing the alternate option. As items for VOCATION were binary, item facility was examined from the proportion of responses for each option. The more equivalent the proportion the more balanced the item. For VOCATION items with floor or ceiling effects were discarded or modified. The facility of changed or new items was then examined with subsequent pretests.
2.2.6.b.	Item Difficulty and Discrimination
Here, an ‘item’ refers to the possible answer(s) for each question on VOCATION. Item difficulty is the
 
first parameter of an IRT model. It is defined as the location on the ability continuum, where the probability of endorsing the item is equal to 50% of the participants. In an interest based assessment, the difficulty parameter reflects the level of interest needed for the participant to have a 50% chance of choosing the item. An item is said to be ‘easy’’ when the probability that 50% of individuals who endorsed it only have a low level on the interest measured by the item. (e.g. an “easy” item measuring Enterprising might be chosen by 50% of participants having only a low level of trait for Enterprising). On the contrary, an item is said to be “difficult”, when the probability that 50% of individuals who endorsed it have a high level of trait (e.g. a “difficult” item measuring Realistic might reach the probability of being chosen by 50% of the participants only if they have a high level of trait for Realistic).
2.2.7.	Pilot Study
This section is only about the final pilot study with the data used (sample) for the stats part of manual).
The final questionnaire was piloted with 309 English-speaking professionals from the United Kingdom. Composite reliabilities for each factor were calculated from generated item factor loadings. Factors were flagged if reliabilities were less than 0.55. Factors that did not converge were inspected for poorly-performing items which were then reviewed, modified or changed and then subjected to another round of pretest. The average scale composite reliability for the Pilot study was 0.83.
 
3.	Scoring
A raw score is the total number of responses endorsed by a candidate for each factor measured. In the context of career-interest assessment, raw scores mean little as they do not provide effective or appropriate comparisons between candidates across a specific interest. Norms enable HR
practitioners, managers and recruiters to evaluate an individual’s score relative to the score of other
delegates who completed the same assessment.

3.1.	The relationship between Raw Scores and Norms
The best norm group is one that is most representative of the characteristics of the individuals taking a test. Applied assessment assumes personality traits, interests, motivations, values, attitudes and perceptions are distributed along a normal probability or bell-shaped curve. Therefore, norm groups effectively identify individual scores across this distribution. In any given population, levels of a target attribute may be found. Therefore, for a given attribute or trait, the normal curve represents the norm or average performance of a population and the scores that are above and below the average for that population (Kaplan & Saccuzzo, 2008). For norms to be meaningful, the sample used must reflect the intended population of test takers. If a test is developed for engineers, the norm sample must consist of engineers in the population. Similarly if an assessment was developed for nurses, it is not appropriate for use in the selection of chemists. Norm groups can range in size from a few hundred to a hundred thousand. However the larger the norm group sample size the closer the approximation to a normal population distribution. Figure 3 shows the normal bell curve.



Figure 3. Normal Bell-shaped curve showing the distribution of percentages, standard deviations and standard ten (Sten).

Key to the creation of norms is the conversion of raw scores into derived scores. This process provides a system of common metrics that readily facilitate the interpretation of test scores. For VOCATION, the forms of score standardization used were: 1) Mean; 2) Median; 3) Standard deviation; 4) Standard score; 5) Standard ten (sten); and 6) Standard error of measurement. Table 4 describes the various types of derived scores used in the validation of VOCATION.
 
Table 4. Types of derived scores used to standardize VOCATION.

	Derived Score	Symbol	Definition and Characteristics
 	 
1	 
Mean	 
µ	 
The average score of all participants who complete an assessment. The mean is calculated by dividing the sum of all scores by the number of participants. The formula for calculating the Mean is:

μ = ( Σ Xi ) / N,

where ΣX is the sum of all the population observations, N is the number of population observations, Σx is the sum of all the sample observations, and n is the number of sample observations.
 	 
2	 
Median	 
~
𝓍	 
The median is the score that separates the highest scores from the lowest. The median can be found by arranging all scores in order from lowest to highest and selecting the score in the middle. Like the mean, median is a measure of the general tendency of a group of scores.
 	 
3	 
Standard Deviation	 
σ	 
A measure of the amount of variation across scores for candidates who take an assessment. A small standard deviation indicates scores are close to the mean while a large value tells us there is much variability across individuals. The formula for calculating the Standard Deviation is:

σ = sqrt [ Σ ( Xi - μ )2 / N ],

where μ is the population mean, Xi is the ith element from the population, and N is the number of elements in the population.
 	 
4	 
Standard Score	 
Z	 
Estimates whether an individual’s score is above average, average or below average compared to peers. Scored on a scale from -4 to 4 with zero in the middle representing average. Positive scores are above average while negative scores are below average. Z scores are calculated using the formula:

z = (x - μx) / σx,
 

			
where X is a normal random variable, μ is the
mean of X, and σ is the standard deviation of X.
 	 
5	 
Standard Ten	 
Sten	 
A standard score with scores ranging from 1 – 10. Here the mean is 5.5 and the standard deviation equals 2. The formula for calculating Sten scores is:

Sten = (𝓍 − 𝓍/𝓍 )2+5.5,

where X is the candidate’s raw score, µ is the mean of raw scores for all candidates, σ is the standard deviation of raw scores on the standardisation sample, multiplied by 2 + 5.5.

Sten scores are rounded to the nearest whole number with values less than 1 or greater than 10 rounded up or down respectively.
 	 
6	 
Standard Error of Measurement	 
SEM	 
SEM is related to test reliability and provides an indication of the dispersion of measurement errors associated with test scores from a group of candidates. It helps us to identify level of errors when estimating candidate’s true scores from their observed scores. The smaller the SEM, the more accurate are the assessments that are being made.
The formula for calculating SEM is:

𝓍𝓍𝓍 = 𝓍 × √(1−𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍𝓍).

3.2.	Transforming Raw Scores to Standardised Scores
For the 60 items in VOCATION, the minimum and maximum overall score for each attribute is 0 and
10. The conversion of raw scores to standardised scores is achieved using a four-step process, as below.

Step 1 Ipsative scores are calculated for each scale by summing all forced-choice responses for each attribute. For each response, 1 is assigned to the response that is endorsed and 0 for the response that is not endorsed.
Step 2  Scores are repositioned on a scale from 0 to 10 by using the following formula:
 
 


Whereby max refers to the maximum possible score of each scale and min refers to the minimum possible score of each scale.



Step 3 To enable the comparisons between individuals, scores for each scale are standardised using the mean and standard deviation across respondents. This process produces a z score using the formula:

z = (score – (μ/𝓍)

Step 4	Standardised scores are then transformed into sten scores from 1 to 10 using the formula:

sten = z * 2 + 5.5

3.3.	Standard Error of Measurement
No test score is perfect. Therefore, we need an estimate of the possible amount of error present within a score. The amount of error associated with a score is known as the standard error of
measurement (SEM). SEMhelps us to understand what is a candidate’s true score and the extent to which it differs from the obtained score (Harvill, 1991). In an ideal world, the SEM would be calculated by having an individual take an assessment on many occasions over a long period of time. The extent to which there was variation across each score obtained by the candidate would be classified as the standard error of measurement.
However, as it is not feasible to assess candidates multiple times, the SEM must be calculated using a different approach.

The SEM is an estimate that is added to or subtracted from a candidate’s score in order to establish a level of confidence about a score. From this confidence band, we are able to determine the extent to which a score may vary. Standard error of measurement is related to reliability. Therefore as reliability increases, SEMdecreases. For a series of scores, approximately 68% of the time, an observed score will lie within +1.0 and -1.0 SEM of the true score. On 95% of occasions, the observed score will be between +1.96 and -1.96 SEM of the true score. Whilst 99% of the time, the observed score will lie within +2.58 and -2.58 SEM of the true score. The 95% confidence band of a score is calculated using the formula:
Confidence band =score ± 1.96 x SEM
Therefore for VOCATION, a factor with a score of 5 and SEM of 0.2, has a confidence band of 4.608 -
5.392. This means we can be 95% confident that an individual’s true score lies in this range.
 
3.4.	Choosing an appropriate Norm Group
Norms give meaning to an individual’s score. The interpretation of the same score may therefore differ depending on whether a score was obtained by a graduate, administrator or seni or manager. For accurate interpretation, it is necessary to compare an individual’s score with a group that is most similar to him/her. To choose the appropriate norm, first identify the country of the candidate. Then from that country, identify the age, gender, educational level, number of years work experience, social professional status, industry or occupational group most appropriate for the candidate.
Alternatively, it is possible to create your own internal norms, based on the candidates that have already been assessed.

3.5.	Creating In-house Norms
It is possible to generate internal organisational norms if there is a relevant sample of 50 or more individuals. In-house norms ensure that comparisons between individuals and the reference group reflect the target role, tasks and work environment as closely as possible. In-house norms are particularly valuable in situations where standard norms are not available, roles are new, the organisation has a unique client-base or business function and in cases where the applicant pool for a role is significantly higher or lower than expected.

To create in-house norms, first calculate the mean and standard deviation for each factor on
VOCATION and score the results based on the step by step guide outlined in Chap ter 3.2. Organisations will then be able to compare individual applicants or employees to a local normal group.
3.6.	Link between Scores and Report Comments
Comments on VOCATION reports reflect the scoring process. An individual receives a score of 0 to 10 (as demonstrated in Chapter 3.2.). The comments provide an extensive interpretation of all facets within the six RIASEC factors of the test. They are chosen from six levels according to the score of the candidate, and detail individual preferences and orientation towards the attributes according to the individual’s score. Higher scores are accompanied by stronger descriptors, weaker scores are accompanied by weaker descriptors, and so on. For example, a candidate with a low score on a factor may be described as ‘not appearing to have an interest’ in the relevant factor. A high score on the other hand may describe an individual as having ‘a strong interest’ in the relevant factor. Scores should be interpreted in relative terms; the order of the targeted profiles is more important than their absolute score.
Combined profiles on VOCATION reports also reflect the scoring process. These profiles represent a combination of the three highest factor scores that the individual has endorsed. They are calculated on the basis that the scores on the first two interests will be of highest, equal significance, whereas the score on third interest will be of slightly lower significance.
 
4.	Sample Descriptives
The sample comprised of 309 professionals from the UK, (142 men; 167 women) ranging in age from 18 to 72 years (µ=43.19; σ=13.92). All the participants represented a range of occupational groups, representing technical, administrative, service, managerial and non-managerial roles, and a range of industries including banking and professional services, marketing and the service sector, manufacturing and product development. Data was collected from the professional research and sampling firm named CINT, and each respondent received compensation for their participation. To ensure the quality of data obtained, participants whose answers were deemed unreliable or who completed the questionnaire in less than 8 minutes were excluded from analyses. Tables 5, 6 and 7 provide an overview of the sample descriptives.

Table 5. Country of Origin.

Candidate
Country	Percentage (%)	N
United Kingdom	100	309

Table 6. Gender.

Gender	Percentage (%)	N
F	167	54.05
H	142	45.95

Table 7. Age Groups.

Age (years)	Percentage (%)	N
18 to 25	14.24	44
26 to 33	15.53	48
34 to 41	14.89	46
42 to 49	12.30	38
50 to 56	22.33	69
Over 57	20.71	64
 
5.	Norms
Norms help us to compare an individual’s score on a test with the scores of others who completed the same assessment, usually under similar conditions. These individuals who took the test at the same time are representative of the population for which an assessment is intended, and are therefore referred to as the norm group. The closer the match between the characteristics of the sample and the target population, the more accurate the distribution will be as a ranking guide. With norms, test developers and psychologists are able to establish comparisons between individuals and make more objective decisions. Norm groups enable us to attribute meaning to test scores and quantify an individual’s performance, or level of an attribute, interest or trait relative to his/her peers.
Tables 8 to 13 detail the mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum scores for the UK sample on factors of VOCATION, for the whole sample on gender, and is organised into categories based on age and gender.

Table 8. Factor score norms for the whole sample.

Factor	Mean	SD	Min	Max	Range	SE
R	4.62	2.13	0	10	10	.12
I	5.65	1.74	1	9.5	8.5	.1
A	5.22	2.31	0	10	10	.13
S	4.82	2.18	0	10	10	.12
E	4.42	1.59	0	8.5	8.5	.09
C	5.27	2.33	0	10	10	.13

Table 9. Facet score norms for the whole sample.

Facet	Mean	SD	Min	Max	Range	SE
R1	4.85	2.63	0	10	10	.15
R2	4.39	2.43	0	10	10	.14
I1	5.69	1.9	1	10	9	.11
I2	5.61	2.15	0	10	10	.12
A1	5.02	2.53	0	10	10	.14
A2	5.43	2.48	0	10	10	.14
S1	5.51	2.43	0	10	10	.14
S2	4.13	2.5	0	10	10	.14
 

E1	4.37	1.68	0	8	8	.1
E2	4.47	2.25	0	10	10	.13
C1	5.71	2.31	0	10	10	.13
C2	4.83	2.97	0	10	10	.17

Table 10. Factor score norms by gender in sample.

Factor	Mean	SD	Min	Max	Range	SE
Female						
R	4.04	1.83	0	8.5	8.5	.14
I	5.4	1.71	1	9	8	.13
A	5.59	2.26	.5	10	9.5	.17
S	5.18	2.24	0	10	10	.17
E	4.31	1.59	1	8.5	7.5	.12
C	5.48	2.36	.5	10	9.5	.18
Male						
R	5.3	2.25	.5	10	9.5	.19
I	5.94	1.73	1.5	9.5	8	.15
A	4.79	2.3	0	9.5	9.5	.19
S	4.39	2.02	0	9.5	9.5	.17
E	4.54	1.59	0	8.5	8.5	.13
C	5.02	2.29	0	10	10	.19

Table 11. Facet score norms by gender in sample.

Facet	Mean	SD	Min	Max	Range	SE
Female						
R1	4.45	2.45	0	10	10	.19
R2	3.62	2.18	0	10	10	.17
I1	5.58	1.92	1	10	9	.15
I2	5.22	2.07	1	10	9	.16
A1	5.43	2.45	0	10	10	.19
A2	5.76	2.45	0	10	10	.19
S1	6.09	2.39	0	10	10	.18
S2	4.28	2.69	0	10	10	.21
E1	4.29	1.68	0	8	8	.13
 

E2	4.34	2.22	0	10	10	.17
C1	6.09	2.21	1	10	9	.17
C2	4.86	3.05	0	10	10	.24
Male						
R1	5.32	2.76	0	10	10	.23
R2	5.29	2.39	0	10	10	.2
I1	5.82	1.86	2	10	8	.16
I2	6.07	2.17	0	10	10	.18
A1	4.55	2.54	0	10	10	.21
A2	5.04	2.47	0	10	10	.21
S1	4.84	2.31	0	9	9	.19
S2	3.95	2.25	0	10	10	.19
E1	4.46	1.67	0	8	8	.14
E2	4.62	2.28	0	10	10	.19
C1	5.26	2.34	0	10	10	.2
C2	4.79	2.88	0	10	10	.24

Table 12. Factor score norms by age groups.

Factor	Mean	SD	Min	Max	Range	SE
18 to 25
R	4.27	2.05	0	8.5	8.5	.31
I	5.58	1.77	2.5	9	6.5	.27
A	6.22	2.41	1	10	9	.36
S	4.14	1.83	1.5	7.5	6	.28
E	4.53	1.45	1.5	7.5	6	.22
C	5.26	2.02	1	9.5	8.5	.3
26 to 33
R	4.93	1.84	1	9	8	.27
I	5.36	1.76	2	9.5	7.5	.25
A	5.24	2.37	0	10	10	.34
S	4.93	1.86	2	10	8	.27
E	4.65	1.61	1.5	8.5	7	.23
C	4.9	2.33	.5	10	9.5	.34
34 to 41						
 

R	4.75	2.09	1	10	9	.31
I	5.95	2.02	1	9.5	8.5	.3
A	5.38	2.1	.5	10	9.5	.31
S	4.26	1.99	1	8.5	7.5	.29
E	4.02	1.52	1.5	7	5.5	.22
C	5.64	1.96	2	10	8	.29
42 to 49
R	5.14	1.8	.5	9.5	9	.29
I	5.55	1.59	2.5	8	5.5	.26
A	5.37	2.5	0	10	10	.41
S	4.95	2.8	0	10	10	.45
E	3.82	1.53	0	8	8	.25
C	5.17	2.61	1	10	9	.42
50 to 56
R	4.83	2.29	1	9	8	.28
I	5.83	1.51	2	9	7	.18
A	4.7	2.03	.5	9	8.5	.24
S	4.99	2.14	.5	9	8.5	.26
E	4.57	1.61	1.5	8.5	7	.19
C	5.09	2.43	1	10	9	.29
Over 57
R	3.98	2.31	.5	9	8.5	.29
I	5.56	1.82	1.5	8.5	7	.23
A	4.91	2.33	.5	9.5	9	.29
S	5.35	2.24	0	9.5	9.5	.28
E	4.66	1.63	1	8	7	.2
C	5.54	2.51	0	10	10	.31

Table 13. Facet score norms by age groups.

Facet	Mean	SD	Min	Max	Range	SE
18 to 25						
R1	4.75	2.83	0	10	10	.43
R2	3.8	1.96	0	8	8	.30
I1	5.52	1.9	2	9	7	.29
 

I2	5.64	2.11	1	10	9	.32
A1	5.93	2.49	1	10	9	.38
A2	6.5	2.64	1	10	9	.4
S1	5.05	2.22	2	9	7	.33
S2	3.23	2.13	0	8	8	.32
E1	4.84	1.6	1	8	7	.24
E2	4.23	1.92	0	7	7	.29
C1	5.45	2.15	1	10	9	.32
C2	5.07	2.43	0	10	10	.37
26 to 33
R1	5.33	2.27	1	10	9	.33
R2	4.52	2.18	0	9	9	.32
I1	5.15	1.95	2	10	8	.28
I2	5.58	2.2	1	10	9	.32
A1	5.04	2.61	0	10	10	.38
A2	5.44	2.47	0	10	10	.36
S1	5.48	2.01	2	10	8	.29
S2	4.38	2.28	0	10	10	.33
E1	4.81	1.96	0	8	8	.28
E2	4.48	2.2	0	9	9	.32
C1	5.25	2.36	0	10	10	.34
C2	4.54	2.97	0	10	10	.43
34 to 41
R1	5	2.8	0	10	10	.41
R2	4.5	2.29	0	10	10	.34
I1	6.02	2.42	1	10	9	.36
I2	5.87	2.11	1	10	9	.31
A1	5.09	2.4	0	10	10	.35
A2	5.67	2.11	0	10	10	.31
S1	5.07	2.23	1	9	8	.33
S2	3.46	2.53	0	9	9	.37
E1	4.28	1.36	1	7	6	.2
E2	3.76	2.3	0	9	9	.34
C1	5.78	2.06	2	10	8	.3
 

C2	5.5	2.68	0	10	10	.4
42 to 49
R1	5.45	2.36	0	10	10	.38
R2	4.84	2.41	1	10	9	.39
I1	5.74	1.73	2	8	6	.28
I2	5.37	1.87	2	9	7	.3
A1	5.26	2.53	0	10	10	.41
A2	5.47	2.85	0	10	10	.46
S1	5.71	2.89	0	10	10	.47
S2	4.18	3.16	0	10	10	.51
E1	3.71	1.54	0	7	7	.25
E2	3.92	2.23	0	9	9	.36
C1	5.66	2.4	2	10	8	.39
C2	4.68	3.21	0	10	10	.52
50 to 56
R1	4.9	2.73	0	10	10	.33
R2	4.77	2.58	0	10	10	.31
I1	5.86	1.55	3	9	6	.19
I2	5.8	2.12	1	10	9	.26
A1	4.48	2.43	0	9	9	.29
A2	4.91	2.17	1	10	9	.26
S1	5.57	2.52	0	10	10	.3
S2	4.42	2.35	0	9	9	.28
E1	4.38	1.65	1	8	7	.2
E2	4.75	2.26	0	10	10	.27
C1	5.88	2.33	2	10	8	.28
C2	4.29	3.06	0	10	10	.37
Over 57
R1	4.03	2.53	0	10	10	.32
R2	3.94	2.74	0	10	10	.34
I1	5.77	1.84	1	9	8	.23
I2	5.36	2.39	0	10	10	.3
A1	4.78	2.57	0	10	10	.32
A2	5.03	2.55	0	10	10	.32
 

S1	6.02	2.59	0	10	10	.32
S2	4.69	2.4	0	10	10	.3
E1	4.17	1.69	1	8	7	.21
E2	5.14	2.27	1	10	9	.28
C1	6.02	2.47	0	10	10	.31
C2	5.06	3.21	0	10	10	.4
 
6.	Reliability
Reliability refers to the extent to which an assessment is free from error and the degree to which items on a scale are measuring the same construct. For a measure to be reliable, the same results must be consistently generated over time. Reliability is important for an assessment as it enables us to have confidence that scores on a test are really typical of an individual’s behaviour, interest, attitude or aptitude. A primary concern when developing and using tests, is the extent to which random measurement errors influence test performance. If a test is unreliable it is impossible for it to be valid, as accuracy of results (validity) depends on the consistency with which the same results are produced. High reliability of an assessment helps to guard against biases that may be caused from errors in human judgment during the recruitment and selection process.

6.1.	Internal Reliability
Internal reliability is a measure of the degree to which items on a scale are internally consistent and measure the same global construct or dimension of a construct. Composite reliability is a robust technique used to assess the internal consistency of items on a scale. It is mathematically defined as the amount of scale score variance accounted for by all underlying factors. Cronbach alpha, while a popular way of determining a measure’s internal reliability, has a major weakness in that it assumes all items on a scale are equally important and therefore weighs all items similarly. As a consequence, if there is an increase in the number of items, reliability would artificially increase even though loadings may be low and not significant.

Therefore, composite reliability is a recommended alternative as it makes use of both item loadings and measurement error (Dunn, Baguley, & Brunsden, 2014; Raykov, 1997; Schmitt, 1996). Internal reliability values vary from 0 to 1, with higher values more desirable. As a rule of thumb, a reliability of .70 or higher is recommended (Nunnally, 1978), with values greater than .9 (excellent); .7 to .9 (good); .6 to .7 (acceptable); .5 to .6 (poor) and values less than .5 (unacceptable). Composite reliability should be ≥ .7.

The formula for Composite Reliability (CR) is:


The composite reliability for VOCATION was computed on the standardised British sample (N=309). Table 14 describes the internal reliability of VOCATION. All the factors showed a composite reliability of above .7 with R and S being .90 and above. On top of this, VOCATION has an overall composite reliability of .83, indicating that the scale has a very good internal consistency and is highly reliable.
 
Table 14. Composite reliability for factors.

Factor	CR
R	.90
I	.73
A	.81
S	.91
E	.81
C	.79

6.2.	Test-Retest

Test-retest reliability involves administering a test twice to the same respondents under similar conditions and comparing the results for each individual in order to determine the stability of the test scores over time. The more similar the scores on the first administration (Time 1) are to the scores on the second administration (Time 2), the greater the reliability. The Pearson Product Moment Correlation Coefficient gives us the correlation between the two administrations and ranges between 0 and 1. The closer the correlation is to 1, the greater the reliability. The formula for the Pearson Product Moment Correlation is:

where [x] and [y] are the two samples’ means and X and Y are the values of each of the two
variables.

For VOCATION, test-retest reliability was calculated on the UK sample (n=88) at two points in time, between 3-6 weeks apart. Participants ranged in age from 21 to 72 years (μ = 48.27, σ =12.22). Test- retest reliabilitywas computed from individual scores for all factors and was calculated using the Pearson Product Moment Correlation Coefficient. Table 15 shows the correlation coefficients between Time 1 and Time 2.

Table 15. Test-Retest Reliability.

Factor	r
R	.84
I	.76
 

A	.84
S	.80
E	.74
C	.87

The test-retest correlations for VOCATIONshow excellent results, with the lowest correlation being at .74 and the average being .81. Therefore it can be concluded that VOCATION is a highly reliable measure overtime as a person taking the test at two different points in time, will consistently get the same results.
 
7.	Validity
Validity refers to the extent to which an assessment measures what it claims to measure, and that this is well-founded and accurately corresponds to actual behaviour. In psychometrics, validity relates to the degree to which practical evidence and scientific theory support the interpretations of test scores. Whilst the reliability of an assessment relates to the degree to which results are consistent over time, validity tells us the degree to which results of an assessment are accurate and enable us to confidently make predictions about a target outcome. Therefore, a test can be re liable but not valid (one can consistently get the wrong answer) but it cannot be valid without being reliable, as confidence in the accuracy of results depends on the consistency with which we obtain the same results. Established validity protects practitioners from faulty, costly, unethical and legally risky decisions.

Validity is derived from the Latin word ‘validus’, meaning strong. According to the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing (Standards; APA, AERA, & NCME, 2014), validation is a process of providing evidence for the scientific basis of interpreting assessment scores. The process of validation therefore depends on evidence supporting: a) test content, b) response processes, c) internal structure, d) relations to other variables, and e) consequences of testing. VOCATION was validated following a thorough multi-stage process that ensured items and factors were accurate, representative, consistent, clear, fair and culturally free.
Face validity is a measure of whether an assessment looks like it is measuring what it claims to be measuring, by those who take it (Nevo, 1985). This is an important aspect to take into account in order to obtain the candidate’s co-operation and commitment. Face validity and attitudes towards tests influence candidates’ motivation, concentration and test-taking anxiety (McCarthy & Goffin, 2003). As a result, the question of ‘Does VOCATION look, to potential candidates, like it measures occupational and vocational preferences?’ was addressed during the creation of the assessment, by way of ensuring that aspects such as the situational questions were not misleading or confusing to the user. The following sections will present, in more detail, further aspects of validity that were taken into account for VOCATION.

7.1.	Concurrent Validity
Concurrent validity measures whether a method is concurrent with the results of another similar tried and tested method. In this case, for concurrent validity to be established for VOCATION, the components of the assessment must correlate highly with corresponding components on other established interest-based questionnaires. Concurrent validity also requires that the two tests are taken at the same time or with little time between them, so that the correlation is pure and unaltered by changes over time. Tables 16 to 18 show the results detailing the concurrent validityfor VOCATION.
 
7.1.1.	The ORVIS IPIP
The International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) is a collection of 2413 internationally recognised personality items. The project was initiated in 1996 and is available in over 25 languages.
The IPIP questionnaire for this study was extracted from the IPIP Website (Goldberg, 1999)

Out of the IPIP scales, The Oregon Vocational Interest Scales (ORVIS) was chosen to be the most adequate scale for concurrent validity as it measures the same constructs as Holland’s RIASEC (Pozzebon, 2010). Table 16 below refers to which factors from VOCATION correspond to which factors from ORVIS

Table 16. VOCATION and corresponding ORVIS factors

VOCATION	ORVIS
R	Production
I	Analysis
A	Creativity
S	Altruism
E	Leadership
C	Organization

Participants were instructed to “Without considering salary, Please rate the degree to which you like to do the following activities, using the following scale”. Participants were asked to rate each statement on a 5-point Likert scale from Strongly dislike (1) to Strongly like (5).

Table 17. Factor correlations between OII-2 and the ORVIS IPIP.

	Production	Analysis	Creativity	Altruism	Leadership	Organization
R	.50***	.04	-.03	-.04	.06	-.11
I	.12	.65***	-.09	-.16	.46***	.31***
A	.20**	-.08	.67***	.17*	.28***	-.14
S	.04	-.23**	.13	.57***	.43***	.00
E	-.04	.04	-.01	.18*	.78***	.42***
 
C	-.25**	.20**	-.39***	-.29***	.09	.59***
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.


Table 18. Facet correlations between the OII-2 and the ORVIS IPIP.

	Production	Analysis	Creativity	Altruism	Leadership	Organization
 	 
R1	.47***	 
-.18*	 
.09	 
.04	 
-.28***	 	 
-.40***
R2	.51***	.19*	.00	-.25***	-.34***	-.26***
I1	.05	.38***	-.07	-.27***	-.37***	-.12
I2	.24**	.43***	.10	-.18*	-.28***	-.26***
A1	.25***	-.16*	.68***	.18*	.01	-.31***
A2	.16*	.03	.47***	-.09	-.18*	-.28***
S1	.11	-.31***	.18*	.60***	-.21**	-.37***
S2	.11	-.26***	.23**	.50***	.24***	-.19**
E1	.28*	.06	.54***	.08	.38**	.10
E2	.04	-.01	.13	.28***	.76***	.29**
C1	-.19*	-.13	-.30***	-.34***	-.52***	.04
C2	-.11	.29***	-.26***	-.35***	-.23***	.37***
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.

The correlations between the factors of the VOCATION and the ORVIS scale show excellent results. The correlations between corresponding factors ranged from .5 (between R and Production) to .78 (between E and Leadership), therefore showing an excellent level of concurrent validity, indicating that VOCATION is consistent with current existing models of occupational interest. For an in-depth look into the relationship between VOCATION and the ORVIS, the correlations between the facets were analysed. The results were mostly consistent with the factor scores, however there were a few differences. For example, E1 correlated highly with creativity, this is likely due to the fact that E1 measures the enterprising mindset, to be innovative and forward thinking, which requires a great deal of creative thought.
 
7.2.	Construct Validity

Construct validity measures the degree to which a test measures what it claims to measure. It refers to the appropriateness of inferences made on the basis of observation or measurement. Construct validity is essential to the overall validity (perceived and actual) of a scale and is particularly valuable when there is much subjectivity to concepts. When a construct is not clearly or thoroughly defined, we are unable to make direct inferences between the construct and other behaviours (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955). Often there is no accepted unit of measurement for constructs; even fairly well known concepts such as intelligence are open to debate. Therefore, the construct validity of a scale may be threatened if the construct is: a) defined as too broad or too narrow, b) mislabelled as a specific dimension of or component within the construct, c) confounded by other related constructs that mask the effects of the main construct, or d) the construct was developed with insufficient research. Therefore, in order to develop a scale that measures occupational and vocational preferences, the construct must reflect known theories that define interests, identify the components that it is comprised of and pinpoints positive and negative attributes associated with each dimension.
For interest-based assessments, construct validity is important as it: a) adds legitimacy and acceptability to the standardised measurement of employee interests, b) facilitates understanding of organisational implications of findings, and c) enables organisations and individuals to tailor
interventions to meet desired targets. Construct validity addresses the question ‘Does VOCATION define and classify occupational and vocational preferences in a way that represents theoretical and practical understanding?’ For VOCATION, construct validitywas established using two approaches: inter-factor correlations and confirmatory factor analysis, as detailed in the sections below.
7.2.1.	Inter-factor Correlations
The factors in VOCATION measure occupational and vocational preferences, however they all measure different facets of interests. In other words, if someone scores highly on a factor, it does not necessarily mean that they will score highly on all factors. Table 19 shows the inter-factor correlations.

Table 19. Inter-factor correlations.

	R	I	A	S	E	C
R	1					
I	.22*	1				
A	-.15	-.30**	1			
S	.23*	-.09	-.01	1		
 
E	.27**	.32**	-.04	.66***	1	
C	-.13	.20	-.45***	-.33***	.10	1
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.

The correlations in Table 19 demonstrate the relationships between the various aspects measured by VOCATION. As can be seen in Table 19, the two factors which correlate most highly are S and E at
.66, this is consistent with Holland’s theory as these two factors are next to each other in the RIASEC hexagon, whilst A and C are opposite of each and are highly negatively correlated at - .45. However we have observed differences, for example E and I are opposite each other in the hexagon, but are seen to be correlated in our model. Perhaps this reflects the investigative nature that is required for modern day entrepreneurship, in fact some of the greatest business leaders and entrepreneurs began as technological innovators, so it’s certainly possible that the lines dividing the hexagon becoming less rigid.
7.2.2.	Confirmatory Factor Analysis
To investigate the theoretical constructs or factors that may be represented by a set of items as well as the quality of individual items, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) are usually performed. EFA and CFA are both forms of factor analysis. Factor analysis examines the factors (hypothetical constructs) of an assessment which are developed to interpret clusters of strong inter-correlations between items in a correlation matrix. Factor analysis aims to simplify a range of items into a few common variables; these can be identified by extracting and grouping items which have high correlations on a factor to reveal the common variables.
The goal of EFA is to identify and maximise the i mportance of each dimension (percentage of variance), while CFA is a hypothesis driven approach that determines the degree to which observed indicators reflect the underlying construct by specifying the number of factors expected and then classifying the value of expected relationships (Schreiber, Nora, Stage, Barlow & King, 2006). In doing so, CFA provides a numerical estimate of the degree to which the proposed factor structure is an accurate fit of the phenomenon in the real world. CFA therefore investigates the degree to which measures of a construct are consistent with established understanding and theoretical arguments for that construct.
A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with continuous factor indicators was conducted in order to check the convergence of the results with the model of the assessment. CFA is a form of factor analysis used to measure that a construct is consistent with its intended meaning. There are two key approaches to confirming the factor structure of a scale. A strict confirmatory approach is one in which a model is tested using structural equation modelling (SEM) goodness of fit tests to determine if the model specified by the research is consistent with the data. On the other hand, an alternative model approach allows two or more models to be tested to identify which has the best f i t. For the development of VOCATION, a strict confirmatory approach was adopted as there is only one formulated model for VOCATION.
 
CFA is used to determine how well the model fits the data, and theref ore evaluating the goodness of fit indices is crucial. Several statistical tests are used to determine how well the model fits the data in CFA and SEM. The closer fit indices meet statistical requirements, the better the model. The Chi Square (X²) statistic is considered the primary index of goodness-of-fit. However, due to proble ms associated with reliance on the X² (sensitivity to sample sizes and inappropriateness when distributional assumptions are violated), measures of relative fit are strongly recommended. The X² is a measure of absolute fit, and provides a fundamental indication of how well the proposed theory fits the data and does not rely on comparison with a baseline model (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1993).
For the validation of VOCATION, the Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA, Steiger & Lind, 1980), the Bentler Comparative Fit Index (CFI), and the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) were chosen as additional measures of fit, as they are the least likely to be affected by sample size (Fan, Thompson & Wang, 1999). Furthermore, using a variety of indices is necessary as different indices reflect different aspects of model fit (Hooper, Coughlan & Mullen, 2008). Like the X², the RMSEA is a measure of absolute fit that assesses the amount of error associated with a proposed model. The lower the RMSEA, the more robust the model; indices of .05 or below are considered to be a good fit (Hu & Bentler, 1999). This is because RMSEA is related to the residuals in the model and assesses the degree to which the proposed model is inaccurate. Both the CFI and TLI are incremental or relative fit indices that assess overall improvement of a proposed model compared with an independence model where observed variables are uncorrelated (Hooper et al., 2008; Holtzman & Vezzu, 2011). While higher values of the CFI and TLI (.9 and above) indicate an excellent fit, it should be noted that a CFI or TLI of .90 or higher may not necessarily correspond to a RMSEA of .05 or less (Hu & Bentler, 1999).
Two CFA analyses were conducted on the 6 factor and 12 factor models. Tables 20 and 21 show the goodness of fit indices and model results.
Thurstonian IRT
“Item response theory (IRT) refers to a set of mathematical models that describe, in probabilistic terms, the relationship between a person’s response to a survey question and his or her level of the ‘latent variable’ being measured by the scale” (Hays & Fayers, 2005, p.55). In ipsative tests, a respondent must make a comparative judgement between two or more items to give an answer.
Conversely, in normative tests, judgement is measured in absolute terms for each evaluated
attribute and does not compare preferences between different attributes. Classical test scoring does not reflect this psychological process of comparison, but rather ignores the fact that respondents indicate a preference not an absolute judgement. Thurstone’s law of comparative judgements (Thurstone, 1927; 1931) generates results based on the comparative judgements of individuals. In order to analyse the data using Thurstonian IRT modelling, raw data was converted into binary outcomes following the procedure described by Brown and Maydeu-Olivares (2011) for Item response modelling of paired comparisons and ranking data. For VOCATION, the 60 questions consisted of blocks of 2 items (response options). The observed responses to the paired comparisons were coded using the formula below, where l indicates the pair {a, b};
 
 


The Thurstonian IRT model was fitted to the binary outcomes of paired comparisons with a structure of both 6 and 12 latent factors. In total, 60 binary outcomes were generated from 60 blocks of two items. Mplus version 7.1 (Muthén & Muthén, 2014) was used to estimate item parameters from tetrachoric correlations using the unweighted least squares (ulsmv) algorithm.

Table 20. Confirmatory factor analysis using Thurstonian IRT for the 6 factor model.

N	X2	df	X2/df	p	RMSEA	P <=.05	CFI	TLI
309	2113.507	1635	1.293	.00	.031	1.000	.850	.837



Table 21. Confirmatory factor analysis using Thurstonian IRT for the 12 factor model.

N	X2	df	X2/df	p	RMSEA	P <= .05	CFI	TLI
309	1881.773	1584	1.188	.00	.025	1.000	.907	.896

Tables 20 and 21 show the model fit results for the two models. Due to the sample size, the more robust estimators of RMSEA and CFI/TLI were used to assess model fit. From these indicators, it can be seen that both models have a good fit and the 12 factor model fits better than the 6. This confirms that VOCATION is a valid model. The fact that the 12 factor fits better than the 6 also gives more credence to the idea that each factor in the RIASEC model can be split into two facets.

7.2.3.	Consequential Validity
Consequential validity emerged from ethical concerns related to societal ramifications of assessments. It can be described as a type of validity evidence that concerns the intended and unintended, positive as well as negative, consequences related to the interpretation and use of assessments (Messick, 1995). Messick (1980, p. 1012) argued that “not only should tests be evaluated in terms of their measurement properties but that testing applications should be
evaluated in terms of their potential social consequences”. Consequential validity is considered to be an important component of the evaluation of validity, rather than an isolated conceptualisation of it (Hubley & Zumbo, 2011). Given the financial costs associated with hiring a candidate, as well as the employment legislation governing diversity and inclusion of specific demographic groups, consequential validityis important for VOCATION. Details of how consequential validity was measured are displayed below, in Chapter 8.
 
8.	VOCATION and Equal Opportunities
Organisations are increasingly under pressure to ensure that tools used to inform employee recruitment, selection, development, promotion and performance measurement decisions are fair, objective and accurate. This pressure stems from a progressively knowledgeable applicant pool, a more sophisticated labour force and stringent local and international employment legislation and testing standards. Equal opportunities therefore represent a critical consideration for any modern day work assessment, and an assessment is only considered to be truly valid when it is appropriate for use with different groups. VOCATION is a fair and accurate measure of occupational and vocational preferences, and HR practitioners and psychologists can be confident of its diverse application.
Within the context of assessment, measures used must not result in adverse impact when applied to different groups. Adverse impact occurs when there is a significant difference in the rate of selection and employment decisions for one protected group over another. This is particularly important for organisations as there is a risk of selecting the wrong candidate for a job, as well as legal and financial costs associated with discrimination claims. Adverse impact is classified as discrimination when a candidate believes (and validity evidence fails to show otherwise) that not being offered a role was based on membership to certain demographics. For most countries across Europe, North America and Australia, fairness in the selection process is subject to legislation. Specifically for the USA, the Employee Testing and other Procedures Act 1971 (US Department of Labor) protects candidates against unfair assessment procedures, whilst fair employment assessment in the UK is protected by the following:

●	Race Relations Act (1976)
●	Sex Discrimination Act (1975;1986)
●	Disability Act (1998)
●	Employment Equality Regulation (2003)
○	Sexual Orientation
○	Religion and Belief
●	Age Discrimination (2006)


8.1.	Measurement Equivalence

Measurement equivalence (ME) refers to the consistency of measurement across some specified group demarcation such as nationality, ethnicity and gender. The focus of ME is to e nsure that individuals from different groups with the same standing on an attribute have the same set of observations on an assessment (Drasgow, 1987; McLeary & Cruise, 2012). Understanding ME is important in assessments in order to establish validity, confidence and equivalence across groups. Equivalence of measurement is obtained when candidates from different cultural backgrounds, age groups, ethnicities, genders and occupational groups with the same level on a trait, have an equal
 
chance of being selected for a role that requires the desired level on this trait. ME helps to determine the extent to which respondents are interpreting items similarly, and identified differences across groups reflect actual differences in the trait being measured (Drasgow, 1984). One approach to assessing measurement equivalence is differential item functioning analysis.



8.1.1.	Differential Item Functioning (Dif)

An item functions differently, or displays Dif, if respondents from different groups have different probabilities of endorsing the item, despite having the same level of the attribute or trait. When a different probability of endorsing an item remains constant across different levels of the attribute or trait, the Dif is said to be uniform. Here, the item of interest consistently gives one group an advantage across all levels of the attribute or trait. Conversely, when a different probability of endorsing an item varies along the level of the attribute or trait, the Dif is characterised as non- uniform (Clauser & Mazor, 1998; Hanson, 1998). Rather than a consistent advantage being given to the reference group across the ability continuum, an advantage to one group over another exists at different levels of the trait. For instance, an item may give the reference group an advantage at the higher end of the continuum, while a disadvantage at the lower end (see Figure 5). Item Response Theory (IRT) facilities Dif analysis by examining the probability of endorsing items through the item characteristic curve. Here, the logistic regression approach is used, whereby separate analyses are run for each item and maximum likelihood estimation used to calculate the probability of endorsing an item. Figures 4 and 5 show an example of item characteristic curves for uniform and non-uniform Dif.
 
 
Figure 4. Item characteristic curve with uniform Dif.









Figure 5. Item characteristic curve with non-uniform DIF.

The DIF analysis provides information on whether an item is perceived in a similar way across gender, age and culture. If there is no DIF, it means that there is no bias that would favour one group over another. For example, two individuals from different countries with a similar absolute interest
 
in the Artistic factor will have the same probability of endorsing the items measuring Artistic. However, true differences between groups may exist (e.g. some cultures are more interested in Artistic, others less). Such true differences are reflected in the norms (see Chapter 4).

8.1.1.a.	DIF Analysis: Gender
DIF analysis was performed across gender in order to ensure that there was not a bias towards either males or females, and therefore that VOCATION is a fair test for both genders. For this analysis, the UK norm sample was divided according to gender; 167 female and 142 male.

Table 22. Coefficients for significant DIF and effect size for DIF items.


Facet	Coefficient	R^2	Effect size
R1	7.417	.023	Negligible
R1	6.01	.02	Negligible
R2	7.593	.022	Negligible
I1	8.013	.034	Negligible
I1	8.225	.028	Negligible
I1	8.063	.026	Negligible
I2	7.299	.023	Negligible
I2	7.115	.025	Negligible
I2	9.992	.037	Negligible
A1	6.619	.019	Negligible
A1	6.345	.018	Negligible
A2	6.194	.019	Negligible
A2	8.093	.028	Negligible
S1	7.823	.025	Negligible
S2	6.005	.016	Negligible
S2	9.925	.037	Negligible
E1	6.71	.025	Negligible
E1	6.977	.028	Negligible
E2	6.669	.025	Negligible

The analysis identified 19 out of the 120 items with a DIF effect for gender. Table 22 shows the DIF coefficient as well as the R^2 effect size. According to Zumbo and Thomas’ (1997) classification of
 
effect size, any R^2 under .13 is considered negligible. Out of the 19 items flagged for DIF 0 showed an effect size of .13 or over, therefore it can be considered that VOCATION does not contain any item that functions differently across genders. Two items (Figure 6 and Figure 7) have been chosen to demonstrate uniform and non-uniform DIF. Figure 6 shows uniform DIF for the item.



Figure 6. Uniform DIF for the facet I2.	Figure 7. Non-uniform DIF for the facet A2.



8.1.1.b.	DIF Analysis: Age
DIF analysis was performed based on age in order to ensure that VOCATION was a fair test for people of all ages. For this analysis, two age groups were defined; 176 aged between 18 and 49 ( M=33.17; SD=9.47 ) and 133 aged 50 or over (M=56.45; SD=4.73).

Table 23. Coefficient and effect size for DIF items.

Question	Coefficient	R^2	Effect size
R2	6.24	.019	Negligible
R2	7.993	.03	Negligible
I1	8.025	.026	Negligible
I1	6.059	.02	Negligible
I2	7.358	.022	Negligible
S1	6.121	.019	Negligible
S1	9.268	.032	Negligible
 

S1	9.387	.036	Negligible
S1	9.381	.024	Negligible
S1	9.211	.036	Negligible
S2	8.607	.031	Negligible
S2	6.016	.018	Negligible
E2	7.478	.029	Negligible
E2	9.659	.032	Negligible

The analysis flagged 14 of the 120 items for DIF based on our age groups. However, as demonstrated in Table 23, the effect size for each of these items is negligible. Therefore, it can be concluded that these items are not discriminatory against people of an older age.

8.1.1.c.	T-tests and ANOVAs
The DIF analysis demonstrates that VOCATION has high consequential validity, and although several items were flagged with DIF, there was a negligible impact on the overall assessment, meaning that the assessment does not bias towards gender or age. Therefore, any significant differences found between genders or age groups can be attributed to real differences between the groups and not biases of the assessment. To further explore the differences between the groups, t-tests and ANOVAS were performed between genders and age groups (see Tables 24 to 29).





Age groups by factors
Participants were separated into six groups according to their age: 18 to 25 (n=44), 26 to 33 (n=48), 34 to 41 (n=46), 42 to 49 (n=38), 50 to 56 (n=69) and Over 57 (n=64).

Table 24: ANOVA for factor by age group.
18 to 25	26 to 33	34 to 41	42 to 49	50 to 56	Over 57	F	df	p-value
R	4.27	4.93	4.75	5.14	4.83	3.98	2.254	5	.049*
I	5.58	5.36	5.95	5.55	5.83	5.56	.733	5	.599
A	6.22	5.24	5.38	5.37	4.7	4.91	2.742	5	.019*
S	4.14	4.93	4.26	4.95	4.99	5.35	2.428	5	.035*
E	4.53	4.65	4.02	3.82	4.57	4.66	2.371	5	.039*
C	5.26	4.9	5.64	5.17	5.09	5.54	.747	5	.589
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.
 
Table 25. Post-hoc t-tests for factors by age groups.

Age	18 to 25	26 to 33	34 to 41	42 to 49	50 to 56
R					
26 to 33	1				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	.94	1	1		
50 to 56	1	1	1	1	
Over 57	1	.297	.917	.114	.314
A					
26 to 33	.609				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	1	1	1		
50 to 56	.009**	1	1	1	
Over 57	.053	1	1	1	1
S					
26 to 33	1				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	1	1	1		
50 to 56	.601	1	1	1	
Over 57	.063	1	.138	1	1
E					
26 to 33	1				
34 to 41	1	.824			
42 to 49	.595	.232	1		
50 to 56	1	1	1	.281	
Over 57	1	1	.56	.141	1
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.

The ANOVA for the RIASEC factors by age groups found significant differences for R, A, S and E. Post hoc analysis was conducted using pairwise t-tests (Bonferroni correction) in order to see where these differences occurred.

The R, S and E post hoc t-tests found there were no significant differences between the six age groups. However, it was found that for factor A, the age group 18 to 25 (M=6.22) was significantly higher than the age group 50 to 56 (M=4.7 , p=.009), with the age group Over 57 (M= 4.91, p=.053)
 
being close to significant. This indicates that younger people may be more interest in artistic endeavours. This may be because the artistic working field is becoming more and more popular, and accessible, in terms of work. Creative careers such as design and illustration are more desirable than ever at present, with companies realising the importance of having such elements in their work. As a result, more and more young people are surrounded by these topics and as the appeal of working in such fields increases, perhaps have more and more interest in the field.

Age groups by facets

Table 26. ANOVA for age-groups by facets.

Facet	18 to 25	26 to 33	34 to 41	42 to 49	50 to 56	Over 57	F	df	p-value
R1	4.75	5.33	5	5.45	4.9	4.03	2.044	5	.072
R2	3.8	4.52	4.5	4.84	4.77	3.94	1.638	5	.15
I1	5.52	5.15	6.02	5.74	5.86	5.77	1.277	5	.273
I2	5.64	5.58	5.87	5.37	5.8	5.36	.506	5	.772
A1	5.93	5.04	5.09	5.26	4.48	4.78	2.006	5	.078
A2	6.50	5.44	5.67	5.47	4.91	5.03	2.727	5	.02*
S1	5.05	5.48	5.07	5.71	5.57	6.02	1.246	5	.287
S2	3.23	4.38	3.46	4.18	4.42	4.69	2.815	5	.017*
E1	4.84	4.81	4.28	3.71	4.38	4.17	2.822	5	.017*
E2	4.23	4.48	3.76	3.92	4.75	5.14	2.925	5	.014*
C1	5.45	5.25	5.78	5.66	5.88	6.02	.804	5	.548
C2	5.07	4.54	5.5	4.68	4.29	5.06	1.174	5	.322
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.

For an in-depth look at the differences between age groups for the RIASEC factors, an ANOVA was conducted on the facets. The results are shown in Table 26 above. The differences found in A were shown to exist in only A2 and not A1, the differences in S were also found to only be in S2 and not in S1. While the differences in E was found to be in E1 and E2, this further indicates that the RIASEC factors should be broken down into facets to be properly interpreted.
The post hoc t-tests for A2 showed that once again the differences existed between the 18 to 25 group (M=6.50) and the 50 to 56 group (M=4.91, p=.013) and Over 57 group (M=5.03, p=.036). This difference could be due to the fact that A2 is more centered around creativity and thinking outside the box, both of which are traits more often seen in the younger generations, who have a fresh outlook on the world. Perhaps the reason why this difference is not also seen in A1 is that A1 is aesthetic appreciation, something which is far less likely to change with age.
 
The post hoc t-tests for E1 showed that the 18 to 25 group (M=4.84) and 26 to 33 group (M=4.81) were both significantly higher than the 42 to 49 group (M=3.71, p=.033 and p=.035) This may be because at a younger age taking risks is necessary in order to advance their careers as there is more to gain and less to lose. Whereas at 42 to 49 people are steady in their careers and ne ed stability to settle down for family reasons.
The post hoc t-tests for E2 indicated that the Over 57 group (M=5.14) was significantly higher than the 42 to 49 group (M=3.92, p=.014). This may be due to the older generation feeling that they have greater wisdom to share and direct the younger generation, while the 42 to 49 group will be as above in stable careers, most likely with higher managers.



Table 27. Post-Hoc t-tests for facets by age.

Age	18 to 25	26 to 33	34 to 41	42 to 49	50 to 56
A2					
26 to 33	.578				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	.892	1	1		
50 to 56	.013*	1	1	1	
Over 57	.036*	1	1	1	1
S2					
26 to 33	.395				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	1	1	1		
50 to 56	.189	1	.61	1	
Over 57	.04*	1	.153	1	1
E1					
26 to 33	1				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	.033*	.035*	1		
50 to 56	1	1	1	.703	
Over 57	.594	.648	1	1	1
E2					
26 to 33	1				
34 to 41	1	1			
42 to 49	1	1	1		
 

50 to 56	1	1	.285	.949	
Over 57	.536	1	.021*	.112	1
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.

Gender
In order to analyse differences in scores between genders, an independent samples t-test was conducted to compare all VOCATION factors between females (n=167) and males (n=142).



Table 28. Gender t-tests for Factor scores.

Factor	Female	Male	T.	df	p
R	4.04	5.3	-5.45	307	.001***
I	5.4	5.94	-2.78	307	.01**
A	5.59	4.79	3.08	307	.001***
S	5.18	4.39	3.22	307	.001***
E	4.31	4.54	-1.26	307	.21
C	5.48	5.02	1.7	307	.09
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.



Table 29. Gender t-tests for Facets.

Facet	Female	Male	T.	df	p
R1	4.45	5.32	-2.93	307	.001***
R2	3.62	5.29	-6.4	307	.001***
I1	5.58	5.82	-1.09	307	.28
I2	5.22	6.07	-3.54	307	.001***
A1	5.43	4.55	3.08	307	.001***
A2	5.76	5.04	2.58	307	.01**
S1	6.09	4.84	4.66	307	.001***
S2	4.28	3.95	1.14	307	.26
 
E1	4.29	4.46	-.89	307	.37
E2	4.34	4.62	-1.11	307	.27
C1	6.09	5.26	3.2	307	.001***
C2	4.86	4.79	.22	307	.83

Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01, ***p < .001.

The t-tests found significant differences between males and females on the factors of R, I, A, and S. Males were found to be significantly more interested in R (male=5.3 vs female=4.04) (t(t307)=-5.45, p=.001), across both R1 (male=5.32 vs female=4.45) (t(t307)=-5.45, p=.001) and R2 (male=5.29 vs female=3.62) (t(t307)=-6.4, p=.001). This could be due to the idea that men are generally expected to be the ones taking manual labour jobs such as mechanics or building, etc.
Males were also found to be significantly more interested in I (male=5.94 vs female=5.40) ( t(t307)=- 2.78, p=.01), however this difference can only be seen in I2 (male=6.07 vs female=5.22) (t(t307)=- 3.54, p=.001). This may be because I2 is focused on technology and research, a field of occupational interests which has been predominantly male-focused for many years, meaning that perhaps cognitive biases exist which cause females to be discouraged by such areas. This could be an interesting area of future research, as societal roles are becoming less entrenched, more schemes aimed at encouraging women into STEMfields are being implemented. We could expect these differences to reduce in younger generations and it may be possible to measure the effect of these schemes using occupational interest inventories.
Females were found to be significantly more A (male=4.79 vs female=5.59) (t(t307)=3.08, p=.001), for both A1 (male=4.55 vs female=5.43) (t(t307)=3.08, p=.001) and A2 (male=5.04 vs female=5.76) (t(t307)=2.58, p=.01). The A1 difference may be due to a tendency for women to be more in touch with their emotions and are therefore, perhaps more willing to express their emotions through artistic endeavours. The A2 difference could be down to an inclination for women to be more intuitive and therefore more interested in roles which require design and imagination.
Females were also found to be significantly more S (male=5.18 vs female=4.39) ( t(t307)=-3.22, p=.001), however this difference was only found for S1 (male=4.84 vs female=6.09) (t(t307)=4.66, p=.001). This difference may exist as a result of women being expected by society to hold more social roles (nurses, teachers, customer service, etc.) which require more dedication to others.
 
9.	Additional Information and Considerations


VOCATION was developed for use in a range of organisational settings. It is important that the appropriate norms, scores and interpretations are used in order to guide HR decisions for recruitment and selection, career development, coaching and performance management. Accurate interpretation of psychometric tests helps both administrators and candidates to: a) put the assessment into context; b) effectivelycompare candidates across target capabilities; c) accurately identify areas for development; d) maximise fit between job requirements and candidate abilities and interests; and e) promote the organisation as a fair and objective place to work. The current chapter gives guidelines for HR practitioners to understand and successfully interpret candidate scores for VOCATION for different organisational objectives.
Report generation software for VOCATION provides graphs and personalised comments for all the 6 factors and 12 facets that relate to the candidate’s score. The report should only be interpreted by professionals who have completed Central Test’s accredited training course and are familiar with this manual. Training in and knowledge of the assessment process are vital as scores should be interpreted in light of information regarding reliability, validity, standard error of measurement, and any accommodations to the assessment or assessment session that were made. Scores should be presented within the context of the assessment and in a clear, meaningful and appropriate way for the target audience.


9.1.	Interpreting Scores
It is important to note that all assessments by Central Test have been developed for HR purposes only. Therefore, no clinical conclusions can be drawn from the results – not even from extreme scores. There are six different levels of comments in total. Levels are determined by a candidate’s score. Table 30 provides an example of descriptors used to describe different levels of a factor.
Extreme scores are defined as the lowest and highest possible values on a factor. For VOCATION, the minimum score is set at 0 and the maximum score is set at 10. Given the ipsative format of the assessment, it is impossible to obtain extreme scores on all factors.
Each factor consists of two facets. High scores on a factor indicate that there is a high probability that the person who is being evaluated can be characterised as having an interest in that factor. Middle scores (i.e. 4-7) indicate a high congruence with the norm group and may be less of a preference for the individual. However, all comments should be viewed as hypotheses that need to be confirmed with other sources of data, such as interviews or further assessments, CV content and references.
 
Table 30. Example descriptors of different levels of a trait in report comments for VOCATION.

Level 1
(score 0 to 2)	Level 2
(score 2.1 to
3.5)	Level 3
(score 3.6 to
5.0)	Level 4
(score 5.1 to
6.4)	Level 5
(score 6.5 to
7.8)	Level 6
(score 7.9 to
10)
Does not seem to indicate an interest	Indicates a very low interest	Indicates a low interest, may occasionally
enjoy	Indicates an interest, but not a
preference	Indicates an interest	Indicates a strong interest



9.2.	Organisational Need: Career selection, Recruitment, and Development
Through the identification of 21st century work interests, VOCATION is an effective tool for both the employer, in the selection of job candidates on the basis of the occupational areas that suit a candidate’s vocational interests, and the job candidate, in the successful selection of an appropriate career navigation.
Choosing an appropriate career path is a difficult task, and with the overwhelming number of working fields that exist in the modern-day occupational world, it can be confusing to know which to take. VOCATION helps to pinpoint a candidate’s most appropriate job as a result of their recreational interests. By choosing a career that will make use of their interests, an individual can find greater job satisfaction.
This then leads to the importance of interest assessment in recruitment. In order to successfully hire a candidate that will feel satisfied with their job and as a result want to remain with the company, job satisfaction of the employee becomes significant to the recruiter. By using VOCATION, an employer will be able to infer how appropriate a job may be for a candidate based on an objective assessment of their interests. If the endorsed interests of said candidate do not align with those of the job role in question, there may not be a good match between the two.
Recruitment and selection is an important organisational function which can be very time consuming and expensive. Furthermore, bad recruitment decisions have additional effects on organisational productivity, capability and sustainability. Whilst someone in financial and legal administration for example, may feel more comfortable if they have a preference for tasks that involve following strict rules, someone working in marketing may be better suited to have an interest in tasks that are more imaginative and creative. It is recommended that prior to administering VOCATION, recruiters have a detailed job description and person specifications based on a job analysis.
VOCATION helps recruiters to customise job profiles in their client account by specifying desired scores for each factor. The assessment allows the recruiter to easily compare the target profile with a candidate’s profile.
Furthermore, VOCATION can be used in line with performance evaluations, which are a key component of employee development and success. Performance reviews should be fair and
 
balanced assessments of an employee’s achievements and capabilities, and should give the opportunity to discuss expectations and accomplishments. VOCATION supports HR practitioners with performance reviews that can help to discuss job performance in relation to occupational and vocational interests; if an individual is not performing as they could be at work, it may be down to a lack of interest in the particular area that they are working on. Identifying this can help the recruiter to identify whether or not the employee should be transferred to another area of the company, or to a different aspect of a project.
Whilst VOCATION is effective in identifying areas for development, it should not be used to directly track an employee’s performance progress. We therefore recommend the use of objective performance assessments or other evaluations in conjunction with VOCATION.






User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 8
 
B.	Some external criteria like the number of years of managerial experience, overall satisfaction with current occupation, accident rate, turnover of the department, promotions/letter of appreciation received in the last 3 years, etc. were identified and the relationship between factor scores and these criterion scores were examined using correlation analysis in studies conducted by the in-house research and innovation department.


	Concurrent validity:

Concurrent validity is the extent to which factors of a test display similarity with similar factors assessed by other contemporary tests. This is normally examined by performing a simple correlation analysis between factor scores across multiple tests based on the same underlying construct. Concurrent validity of this test was examined with NEO-PI-R and it was found to be satisfactory (r=0.66 to 0.90).


3.4	Socio-Cultural Considerations

A good psychometric test should demonstrate sensitivity towards social and cultural factors that are supposed to have a bearing on the construct the test is measuring. At the same time, it should not be biased towards any particular group of people (especially those protected by law). A good test should not show a significant positive or negative discrimination towards any particular group of people.

Scores against the following sociocultural variables were examined in order to identify any such bias on the part of the test:

A.	Gender

B.	Age

C.	Race

Only two such variables demonstrated some sort of association with few factors. These are summarized below:










User Manual – Big Five Profile © Central Test 2016	p. 9
 
3.4.1	Gender differences:



Factor	Mean M	Mean F
	(N=)	(N=)
Consciousness of Others	5.36	5.30
Sociability/Dynamism	4.87	5.69
Emotional Balance	4.95	4.11
Meticulousness	4.60	4.88
Openness/Imagination	5.25	5.07

*equal variance was observed between both the groups. In red, the significant differences - p<0.05


Females score higher on sociability/dynamism in comparison to males. This confirms findings of other independent research studies and provides further evidence of construct validity of the test. In the same manner, males were observed to have higher scores on emotional balance in comparison to females.



3.4.2	Age effect:


Factors	Consciousness	Sociability	Emotional	Meticulousness	Openness/
	of Others	Dynamism	Balance		Imagination
r	-0.19	0.02	-0.06	0.00	0.24

The observed correlations, though statistically significant in two cases, have no practical implication as they are less than 0.30. Therefore, it can be rightly derived that the test has no potential biases against (or in favour of) any social or cultural group.


TECHNICAL MANUAL & USER GUIDE
PROFESSIONAL PROFILE 2




Paula A. Cruise Claire de Loye Katharina Weber
 



























 


Copyright © 2015 by Central Test Ltd., or its affiliate(s)


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photography, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without written permission from Central Test and the authors.


The Central Test logo and Professional Profile 2 are trademarks in France, Europe and/or other countries, of Central Test Ltd. or its affiliate(s).
 
Acknowledgement
The Professional Profile 2© is the result of a long process. We wish to recognise everyone who contributed to its development. It is the fruitful outcome of a collaborative effort of several psychologists, HR professionals as well as other reviewers, and practitioners.
We are highly indebted to the following individuals who have participated in the varied steps of creating a valid assessment: Manuel Azzola, Lauren Binnie, Laura Brady, Anshu Dravid, Raji Hariharan, Patrick Leguide, Disha Mallya, Lucia Mititel, Mirah Rakotomalala, Helen Simard, Sabine Socias, Shweta Sonawane and Meghana Srivatsa. We would like to thank Krishnatreya Brindavanam and Dr Céline Jouffray for their work on previous versions of this manual. Furthermore we would like to acknowledge our IT professionals for their constant support and technical expertise.
We are thankful to Thalia Anagnostopoulou (Career Development Centre, City University London); the Career Development Centre at Cambridge University, Ben Stanfield-Davis (London South Bank University) and Bradley Aldous (Qualtrics), as well as clients, organisations and HR recruiters for their help with data collection for validation studies.
Special thanks to Dr William P. Skorupski (University of Kansas) for his R analytical software training and to Dr Anna Brown (University of Kent) and Linda K. Muthén & Bengt Muthén for their guidance on IRT modelling and MPlus software.














France

28 Boulevard de la Bastille 75012 Paris	United Kingdom

72 Hammersmith Road W14 8TH London




India

15, KMJ Arcadia, Industrial Main Road Koramangala 5th Block
Bangalore	



Madagascar

Domaine d'Ankatso #13, Ambohidepona, 1O1,
Antananarivo
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
Acknowledgement	3
Introduction	7
1.	General Description and Applicability	8
1.1.	Main areas of application	12
1.2.	Question structure	12
1.3.	Mode of administration, languages and special requirements	13
1.4.	Social desirability	13
1.5.	Test-taker requirements and recommendations	14
1.6.	Administrator qualifications and recommendations	14
1.6.1.	Testing conditions	15
1.6.2.	Answering questions	15
1.6.3.	Administration instructions	16
1.7.	Technical and security issues	17
1.7.1.	Respecting the ethical charter	17
1.7.2.	Confidentiality and Security of user data	17
1.7.3.	Hardware architecture and server availability	18
1.7.4.	Computer generated reports	18
1.8.	Supply, conditions and availability	18
2.	Conceptual & Practical Scale Development	19
2.1.	Theoretical background	19
2.1.1.	The history and value of psychometric testing to personnel assessment	19
2.1.2.	Personality and employee effectiveness	19
2.1.3.	Different approaches to personality: type versus trait	20
2.1.4.	Personality theories used in the Professional Profile 2©	21
2.1.5.	Motivations and values in the workplace	23
2.1.6.	Motivations and values theories used in the Professional Profile 2©	24
2.2.	Development of Professional Profile 2©	28
2.2.1.	Dimensions and Item Construction	28
2.2.2.	Ipsative Response Format	29
2.2.3.	Thurstonian Item Response Theory (IRT) and Ipsative Responses	29
2.2.4.	Pre-tests and Pilots	31
3.	Scoring	38
3.1.	The relationship between raw scores and norms	38
3.2.	Transforming raw scores to standardised scores	40
3.3.	Standard error of measurement	40
3.4.	Choosing an appropriate norm group	41
3.5.	Creating in-house norms	41
3.6.	Link between scores and Report comments	41
3.7.	Scoring the Profile Fit Percentages	42
4.	Norms	43
4.1.	Standardisation studies	43
4.2.	Sample description and French Norms	43
4.3.	Sample description and UK Norms	53
4.4.	Sample description and USA Norms	62
5.	Reliability	65
5.1.	Internal Reliability	65
5.2.	Split-half Reliability	66
5.3.	Test-retest Reliability	68
6.	Validity	69
6.1.	Content Validity	69
6.2.	Construct Validity	70
6.2.1.	Subscale Inter-correlations	73
6.2.2.	Confirmation of Factor Structure	77
6.3.	Discriminant and Convergent Validity	87
6.3.1.	The Professional Profile 2©, the BF-10 and TIPI	87
6.3.2.	The Professional Profile 2© and the IPIP	91
6.4.	Predictive Concurrent Validity	98
6.4.1.	Measure – The Work Design Questionnaire	98
6.4.2.	Results - The relationship between Professional Profile 2© and work design	98
6.4.3.	Measure – The RIASEC questionnaire	99
6.4.4.	Results - The relationship between Professional Profile 2© and RIASEC	100
6.4.5.	The Professional Profile 2©, Multidimensional Work Ethic Profile, Organizational Citizenship Behavior Checklist and Utrecht Work Engagement Scale	101
6.4.6.	Results - the Professional Profile 2© personality and motivation traits and the Multidimensional Work Ethic Profile, the Organizational Citizenship Behavior Checklist and the Utrecht Work Engagement Scale	102
6.5.	Predictive Criterion Validity	104
6.5.1.	The relationship between Professional Profile 2© and self-assessed work competencies105
6.5.2.	The relationship between the Professional Profile 2© and reviewer-assessed work competencies	109
6.5.3.	The relationship between the Professional Profile 2© and organisational trust propensity
.	114
6.6.	Face Validity	115
6.6.1.	Response Audit	115
6.6.2.	Examining face validity: the Professional Profile 2© and candidates	120
6.7.	Consequential Validity	125
7.	The Professional Profile 2© and Equal Opportunities	126
7.1.	Measurement Equivalence	126
7.1.1.	Differential Item Functioning (Dif)	126
7.2.	Dif Analyses for the Professional Profile 2©	127
7.2.1.	Dif Analysis: Gender	128
7.2.2.	Dif Analysis: Age	130
7.2.3.	Dif Analysis: Country	132
8.	Additional Information and Considerations	138
8.1.	Interpreting scores	138
8.2.	Organisational Need: Recruitment and Selection	139
8.3.	Organisational Need: Career Guidance, Coaching and Development	139
8.4.	Organisational Need: Performance Management & Evaluation	140
References	142
Appendix: Sample reports	156
a)	Standard report	156
b)	Additional Options	168
c)	Extreme scores	186
Comments for extreme scores on main factors	186
Comments for extreme scores on opposing factors	190
List of Tables	194
List of Figures	197
 
Introduction
The Professional Profile 2© is a personality questionnaire that analyses an individual’s preferences, motivations and values at work. Consisting of 112 questions, it is a useful tool for employee recruitment, training and career development.
The assessment provides an in-depth analysis of a candidate's personality profile and job temperament based on 14 fundamental opposing dimensions of the human character (e.g. introversion - extraversion, team work - autonomy). The scale was specifically developed to evaluate personality traits in the workplace, identify a candidate's strengths, potential weaknesses and areas for development. Profiles generated by the Professional Profile 2© will help decision-makers to optimise job, team and organisational fit.
The Professional Profile 2© has been validated with more than a thousand professionals from a variety of occupations, educational levels and age groups. Due to its robust psychological approach and practitioner-based results, the assessment is utilised by HR personnel, managers, psychologists, coaches, training and recruitment consultants all over the world. There are several features that distinguish the Professional Profile 2© from other work-based personality assessments. These include:
•	More contemporary and business relevant items
•	Significantly shorter with only 112 items
•	Average completion time of 15 minutes
•	Measured dimensions based on both theory and competency requirements specified by HR practitioners, line managers, recruitment and training consultants
•	Developed in multiple languages simultaneously with professionals across the globe
•	Ipsative scaling to guard against social desirability and impression management
•	Built-in response audit to ensure face validity
•	Valid and reliable with studies conducted with professionals from 4 continents (North America, Europe, East Asia and Australasia)
•	Developed using state-of-the-art psychometric techniques such as Thurstonian Item Response Theory
•	User-friendly and customizable reports that can be easily tailored by the administrator
•	Practical and easy-to understand reports
•	Information on job fit, team fit, organisational fit, individual strengths and areas for development as standard.
In this manual & user guide you will find useful information about the questionnaire’s development, theoretical background, psychometric properties and practical applications.
Chapters 1, 2, 3 and 8 are specifically tailored for HR practitioners whilst chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 comprise of detailed technical information and psychological information.
This test has been granted registration as a psychological test by the British Psychological Society, Psychological Testing Centre.




 
1.	General Description and Applicability
The Professional Profile 2© provides an in-depth analysis of a candidate’s personality profile and professional aspirations based on fourteen fundamental aspects of the human character. The assessment combines values, motivations and personality in order to enable recruiters, HR professionals and psychologists to accurately assess fit between a job and a candidate. This dual approach is valuable as:

•	Personality traits influence how an individual is likely to act, adapt to and function effectively in a given situation

•	Motivations and values influence choices and decisions and therefore shed light on what drives an individual to act


Personality

The Professional Profile 2© measures seven opposing pairs of personality dimensions within the context of work. The assessment is based on established models of personality – like the “Five Factor Model” and the “Theory of Psychological Types”, as well as documented evidence on the value of personality measurement to organisational effectiveness. Dimensions represent an individual’s approach to communicating, conflict handling, coping with pressure, interacting with others, managing ambiguity, decision-making and problem solving respectively. The seven paired dimensions of personality are defined as:

Persuasiveness
The ease with which an individual is able to convince and influence others using tact and adapt his/her speech for an audience, whilst Straightforwardness refers to being authentic and direct in communication, with a need to remain transparent. High persuasiveness scorers tend to be strategic and influential. High straightforwardness scorers generally thrive in settings where transparency is essential.

Flexibility
A willingness to be open to making concessions when dealing with others in order to seek consensus and avoid conflict, whilst Firmness refers to a tendency to defend one's own point of view and remain determined during exchanges with others. High flexibility scorers are generally good at taking others’ perspectives into account during discussions. High firmness scorers are well suited for roles that require bargaining and tough negotiations.

Emotional Distance
The tendency to stay calm and composed even when faced with stressful or unsettling situations, whilst Emotional Sensitivity refers to the tendency to react to stress, take things to heart and readily express emotions. High emotional distance scorers are best suited for stressful settings that require a cool head and emotional control at all times. High emotional sensitivity scorers tend to be the first in a team to react to subtleties in the environment.

Extraversion
The tendency to be outgoing and lively, seeking to develop many friendly contacts, whilst Introversion refers to being reserved and formal, choosing to maintain only a few close relationships. High extraversion scorers thrive in positions that require much relationship building and public speaking. High introversion scorers generally remain productive and motivated even without social contact.

Improvisation
Being spontaneous and acting without clear planning, and at ease when facing unexpected situations, whilst Structure refers to a preference for being organised, methodical and referring to procedures. High structure scorers are best suited for projects that have very strict deadlines and require detailed planning well in advance. High improvisation scorers tend to find solutions even in very ambiguous circumstances.




8
Professional Profile 2© Central Test 2015
 
Focus on facts
The tendency to be objective, logical, analytical and rational when evaluating information and making decisions, whilst Intuition refers to the tendency to appraise situations and make choices based on personal insights, instincts, impressions and 'gut feeling'. High intuition scorers are assets to environments that demand sharp instincts and immediate remedies. Individuals who have a high focus on facts score excel in settings where objective analysis is required and quick decisions costly.

Rule-following
The tendency to respect and comply with established guidelines and standards set by the organisation and society, whilst Free-thinking is the tendency to create or modify rules if existing ones are considered inefficient and impractical. High free-thinking scorers tend to thrive in organisations that encourage productivity without clearly-defined rules. High rule-following scorers are best suited for positions that require enforcement of regulations for quality, safety or legal reasons.

Values and Motivations

The Professional Profile 2© also measures seven opposing pairs of values and motivations within the context of work. These dimensions are based on extensive evidence highlighting the importance of values, needs and drives for employee success. Modern ways of working are more complex, fluid, integrated and demanding than roles of yesteryear. Employee engagement, work-life balance, well-being, career- management, cross-functional and cross-border team working are key issues facing the twenty-first century organisation (Cruise, 2011; Judge & Kammeyer-Mueller, 2012; Sonnentag, Kuttler, & Fritz, 2010; Stiglbauer, Selenko, Batinic, & Jodlbauer, 2012). Managers and recruiters therefore need to understand the value employees place on work, as well as their; a) commitment orientation; b) leadership orientation;
c) task preferences; d) achievement values; e) teamwork orientation; and f) adaptability orientation.

The seven paired dimensions of values and motivations are defined as:

Involvement at work
The importance given to work and an individual’s emotional bonding with an organisation, whilst Personal balance refers to a preference for separating one's personal and professional lives and balancing the two. High involvement at work scorers are well suited for organisations with a culture of full dedication and commitment. High personal balance scorers are best suited for organisations that encourage and advocate work-like balance.

Desire to lead
The inclination to take charge in situations and to seek roles that require leading people, whilst Desire for guidance refers to the preference for supervision, regular feedback, and clearly defined directives. High desire to lead scorers are likely to take the lead on projects and are eager to take up responsibilities. High desire for guidance scorers thrive in positions that offer opportunities for direct mentorship and learning.

Need for action
A tendency to be dynamic and prefer short term projects that deliver quick and concrete results, while Need for reflection refers to a preference for complex, long term projects that yield results in the future and require more strategy, patience and reflection. High need for action scorers excel in settings characterised by a fast work pace and speedy decision-making. High need for reflection scorers are assets to roles characterised by strategic tasks spread over long periods of time.

Ambition
The competitive drive towards success and achievement, setting high and risky goals, whilst Humility refers to the tendency to be satisfied with one's current status and be comfortable with professional stability. High ambition scorers tend to thrive in organisations that are highly pressurised and competitive. High humility scorers enjoy stability at work and thrive in harmonious environments.

Autonomy
A preference for independence and freedom while working. Team work refers to the tendency to enjoy group work, be cooperative and focus on team cohesiveness. High autonomy scorers are well-suited for projects that require self-reliance and individual focus. High team work scorers excel in organisations that demand idea generation through collaboration.
 
Altruism
The inclination to be concerned about people and generous with one's time and resources, wanting to contribute to the greater good. Individualism refers to being practical and realistic with a focus on one's personal objectives. High altruism scorers excel in organisations that actively promote social responsibility and people development. High individualism scorers tend to thrive in highly results-oriented settings.

Novelty seeking
Being inquisitive with an inclination to explore and experiment with new ways of doing things. Familiarity seeking refers to being more comfortable with what one is accustomed to and follow proven methods over experimental approaches. High novelty seeking scorers are committed to innovation and improving outdated practices. High familiarity seeking scorers are assets to organisations that require the use of methods that have a proven track record.
 










 




Figure 1. Personality, values and motivation dimensions measured by the Professional Profile 2©






11
Professional Profile 2© Central Test 2015
 
1.1.	Main areas of application
The Professional Profile 2© was specifically designed to help HR professionals, managers and business practitioners recruit, select and develop employees across the globe. It may be used throughout an employee's career life-span and is suitable for both management and non-management employees. The questionnaire can also be used in conjunction with other occupational-based assessments to acquire a more comprehensive profile of individuals in specific roles. For example, combining the Professional Profile 2© with the Sales Profile R© provides in-depth insight into how well a sales person is likely to integrate into a team, the type of sales s/he would be best suited for and the organisational setting s/he is likely to thrive in.

Applications are varied. The Professional Profile 2© is suitable for individuals, teams and organisational assessment. Specifically, it is designed for use in: a) individual recruitment, career management, career guidance, coaching and development; b) team development, profiling, conflict resolution and effectiveness; and c) organisational succession planning; performance evaluation, performance management, job analyses, culture and engagement audits.


1.2.	Question structure
The Professional Profile 2© consists of 84 core questions and 28 audit questions. Questions are presented in forced-choice format, whereby each question is comprised of two general statements that require the candidate to choose the option that best represents their preference. Each question assesses different components of either personality or motivation dimensions. This means that each dimension is measured by 16 items - 8 items for each factor. The questionnaire therefore measures 224 behaviours whilst appearing significantly shorter. Items are mirrored so that each response option assesses a different dimension – personality items are paired with personality items and motivation items are paired with motivation items. This combined approach means that both, the individual’s personality trait and motivation orientation associated with a targeted behaviour, are captured. This results in a more realistic measurement of human behaviour as personality and motivation at work have traditionally been measured with separate instruments. This item structure also reduces the likelihood of respondent fatigue and response bias. Furthermore, forcing respondents to choose one of two options safeguards against impression management and candidates’ attempts to fake results.


Example 1.
I try to find my way out of disagreements
	I know how to be inventive in situations of uncertainty

Example 2.

Being helpful is essential to me
	I enjoy being responsible for a group

Figure 2. Examples of two forced-choice items on the Professional Profile 2©.


In addition to the core 84 questions, the Professional Profile 2© has a built-in response audit scale comprised of 28 questions; the items were generated from statistical computations and are based on correlations from the trait and dimension factor structures. The total number of questions to be completed by each candidate is 112. The audit scale uses pairs of forced-choice descriptors, which measures the same dimension in order to directly assess the main and opposing factors of each dimension (e.g. Introversion vs. Extraversion). As individuals tend to be more experienced with Likert-scale work assessments in which they can position themselves in relation to a trait, the response audit facilitates both a pleasant test-taking experience, as well as the face validity of results. Figure 3 shows an example of an item from the response audit used in the Professional Profile 2©.

12
Professional Profile 2© Central Test 2015
 
Example Audit
Item
I am non-conforming
	I respect rules
Figure	3.
Example of an item on the response audit of the Professional Profile 2©.


1.3.	Mode of administration, languages and special requirements
Professional Profile 2© is administered online and works with all modern computer operating systems including Windows, MAC-OS and Linux. A PDF version of the questionnaire is available if required. Like other modern personality questionnaires, the assessment can be administered remotely and without supervision. However, should standardised group assessments be required, this can easily be accommodated. Reports are solely generated online. Therefore, if the test has been administered in paper-format, an administrator must manually enter candidate responses into the online platform of the questionnaire to generate candidate reports.

The questionnaire is currently available in Arabic, English and French and will soon be available in Dutch, German, Portuguese and Spanish. For more information on language availability please contact the Central Test Consulting Service (consulting@centraltest.com).

Professional Profile 2© was designed to be easily used by individuals from diverse backgrounds and those with a range of special needs. All test-takers are able to adjust visual screen specifications based on individual requirements. For example, respondents with visual impairments or those requiring a larger font size for comfort, may increase the font size by enlarging the computer screen’s display (by pressing "CTRL" and "+"). Similarly, respondents are able to access test instructions throughout the course of the assessment. It is also possible to navigate through questions or change answers as desired by selecting on-screen prompts. Alternatively, for blind candidates or those with severe visual disabilities, items may be read aloud by a trained administrator. Individuals with hearing impairments are not excluded from taking the questionnaire since all content is presented visually.

Although the average time for completion is 15 minutes, the Professional Profile 2© has no set time limit. Therefore, individuals with learning disabilities are able to take the time they need to complete the assessment. Administrators are encouraged to consider whether a candidate who needed an unusual amount of time to take the test may have special needs. Please contact the test publisher for guidance on administering the questionnaire to individuals or groups with special requirements.


1.4.	Social desirability

Social desirability is the tendency to present oneself in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others. When done unintentionally, it is referred to as self-deception. When done intentionally it is referred to as impression management (Tett & Simonet, 2011). As people are social by nature, they are generally inclined to seek some degree of social acceptance. Unlike aptitude tests, the results of personality questionnaires like the Professional Profile 2© are affected by impression management. An individual’s attempt to present himself/herself in a favourable light negatively impacts test results, whether the questionnaire is completed online or in paper-based format (Dodou & de Winter, 2014).

Social desirability is a particular concern in the context of recruitment, as a candidate is usually tempted to answer in a way to impress the recruiter even though there are no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ answers. Candidates may provide responses according to what they feel, recruiters may expect from them to fulfil a role. As a result, social desirability is a significant risk to the validity of assessments (Mueller-Hanson, Heggestad, & Thornton, 2003). If social desirability was equivalent across all candidates, then test administrators would be able to factor it into the scoring and interpretation of results. However as faking differs across individuals, distortions in scores may result in an increased likelihood of the wrong candidate being hired (e.g. Rosse, Stecher, Miller, & Levin, 1998).

The Professional Profile 2© actively guards against social desirability with the use of an ipsative questionnaire format and built-in response audit. Research has found ipsative measures to be more
 
resistant to distorted responding compared to more commonly used Likert-scales (Bowen, Martin, & Hunt, 2002; Kluger, Reilly, & Russell, 1991). Not only does the ipsative format reduce candidates’ ability to improve their scores, items are combined in such a manner that makes it difficult for candidates to conceive a response strategy as items are paired with equally appealing response options.


1.5.	Test-taker requirements and recommendations
The Professional Profile 2© was designed for members of the general population 20 years and older and is suitable for all occupational roles. It is recommended that candidates receive notification of the objective of the assessment, conditions under which it will be administered, how data will be handled and stored, and the nature of any feedback well in advance. Potential candidates should also be asked to inform the test administrator beforehand of any special needs or requirements.

Previous test-taking experience is not required to take the Professional Profile 2©. Similarly, advanced education and work experience are not requirements to successfully take the assessment.


1.6.	Administrator qualifications and recommendations

The assessment was developed to be used by human resource (HR) professionals, training and executive development professionals, counsellors and psychologists. To administer the Professional Profile 2©, practitioners must complete standardised training and/ or possess accredited testing standards qualifications. Training is designed to ensure administrators are able to administer the assessment under standardised conditions; score and norm results; interpret scores and generate written and verbal feedback for a range of organisational needs.

It is recommended that all administrators take the Professional Profile 2©, prior to administering the assessment making sure to comply with all instructions. This will enable practitioners to become familiar with the assessment and therefore anticipate questions or challenges that may be identified by candidates.

Test administration must be in accordance with the organisation’s code of practice, as well as legal assessment guidelines on the use of psychometric assessments for employment purposes. All steps must be taken to ensure test administration is objective and fair. Therefore, it is particularly recommended that administrators are aware of international and country laws governing; a) Data Protection, b) Gender Discrimination, c) Age Discrimination, d) Race and Ethnicity Relations, e) Disabilities Discrimination, and f) Religious Discrimination prior to administration.

Additionally, prior to use administrators must be familiar with Central Test's conditions of use and code of ethics and adhere to its quality charter. Administrators must:

•	Ensure that the appropriate test has been chosen to meet the specified organisational need.
•	Make sure that the candidate is informed about the assessment and its purpose prior to administration.
•	Achieve candidates’ consent prior to administration
•	Use appropriate norms to interpret results
•	Provide candidates with feedback on results.
•	Delete questionnaire results and personal candidate data upon demand.
•	Treat results and candidate data confidentially and obtain candidate consent before transferring personal data or results to third parties.
•	Ensure that only qualified personnel administer assessments and have access to data
•	Ensure that test materials and reports are stored in secure environments

For more detailed information about Central Test's code of ethics, refer to Central Test's quality charter.
 
1.6.1.	Testing conditions
For best results and candidate experience, the Professional Profile 2© should be administered in a quiet, well lit and ventilated environment. Candidates must be informed about the assessment in advance and should have sufficient time to take it. In order to reduce candidates’ anxiety, the assessment should be referred to as a questionnaire and not as a test.

For online assessment, it is important that candidates have comfortable seating, adequate desk space, adequate computer screen size, a keyboard and a mouse. Prior to testing, administrators should ensure that all relevant candidate background information has been collected and verified in order to confirm that the candidate taking the assessment is the right individual.

In cases where individuals take the assessment in the privacy of their home or a convenient location, it is recommended that they do so using a computer they are familiar and comfortable with. For security purposes, all background information and candidate details must be provided to the administrator prior to a candidate taking the assessment. The background information is prefilled by the test administrator but can be corrected by the candidate after the completion of the assessment, when verifying ‘Additional Information’. Candidates receive notification to take the questionnaire via e-mail with an embedded web link and login details. Web links to the questionnaire are password protected and unique to a candidate’s account. It is possible to set expiration dates in order to ensure candidates complete the questionnaire within a specified time-frame. For additional security administrators can also configure the invitation to ensure that the assessment must be completed from the same IP address once the questionnaire has been accessed.

The Professional Profile 2© has no time restriction. However, candidates generally take between 12 and 20 minutes to complete the questionnaire. For monitoring purposes, completion times are recorded to ensure a pleasant candidate test-taking experience. It also allows administrators to see if a candidate rushed through the questionnaire or needed an unusual amount of time to complete the assessment. Candidates are encouraged to answer questions quickly in order to avoid spending too much time thinking about each statement. For personality questionnaires, it is generally recommended that respondents answer spontaneously as there are no right or wrong answers. Candidates should also be urged to answer honestly as the built-in response audit is designed to identify inconsistencies in responses.


1.6.2.	Answering questions
Although instructions for completing the Professional Profile 2© questionnaire are presented on-screen it is important that administrators establish and maintain rapport with candidates. Prior to starting the assessment, instructions should be read aloud by the administrator with candidates given an opportunity to ask questions before taking the assessment. Administrators should verify that candidates understand what they are required to do prior to starting the assessment session.

Guidelines for a few scenarios:

•	If candidates have questions after the assessment session has begun, the administrator should try to answer them without disturbing other candidates.

•		If a candidate does not understand a question, the administrator should answer carefully and avoid explaining the meaning of words or items in his/her own words in order to not lead the candidate toward specific responses. Instead, the administrator should check if the question is part of the lexical guide (contact Central Test for a copy). This guide contains standardised descriptions of items that could be potentially challenging for some individuals.

•	If an administrator suspects that a candidate’s lack of understanding is due to education level, the assessment should be abandoned.
 
•	If an administrator suspects that a candidate’s lack of understanding is due to language proficiency, the administrator should ask the candidate to take the assessment in the language they are most comfortable with (or language s/he dreams in).

•	If an administrator suspects that a candidate’s lack of understanding is due to overcautious responding, the candidate should be encouraged to endorse their most likely response.


1.6.3.	Administration instructions
On screen administration instructions are the same for individual home-based and administrator-based assessment. Standardised instructions ensure that all participants are exposed to the same conditions during assessment; the assessment process is fair and objective and assessment conditions do not directly or indirectly give any individual or group an advantage.

Prior to assessment, administrators should ensure they have the following:

•	This manual
•	Welcome script to inform candidates of the purpose of the assessment, why the assessment is being used as part of the organisational process, and what will happen during the testing session
•	Test log to verify candidate details and record incidents during the session
•	In the case of paper-based assessment, printed PDF copies of the Professional Profile 2©
questionnaire and pens
•	Lexical guide to answer potential candidate questions

Candidates who take the Professional Profile 2© as a home-based assessment from their private computer are guided through the instructions on their screen. Administrators of group administrations may guide participants after the introduction screen for the Professional Profile 2© has been accessed and the candidate is seated in front of the computer or the printed PDF copies by reading out the following on- screen instructions:


The on-screen instructions will take you through the entire questionnaire. Please follow on your screen (paper) whilst I read the instructions out loud:
Welcome!
You are about to take the Professional Profile 2©, a work personality assessment. Please read the
instructions that follow.
The following questionnaire will assess your personality at work.
This questionnaire is composed of 112 questions.
It should take you approximately 15 minutes to complete the assessment.
For each set, indicate which statement best describes your personality or your beliefs by clicking the corresponding box.

It is possible that neither of the statements describes you exactly.

In such instances, kindly choose the statement that describes you the closest.



After a brief pause say:
•	Do you understand what you are expected to do?
•	If you would like to increase the screen size, please press CTRL +, if you would like to decrease the screen size, please press CTRL -. Please try this now (Pause and allow candidates to adjust screens).
•	If you need help, please raise your hand and I will come by to help you.
 
•	All questions have to be answered. If you forget to answer a question, an information box will appear and indicate the questions that you need to answer in order to be able to continue.
•	At the end of the questionnaire you will be presented with some demographic questions. Please answer them honestly.
•	Do you have any questions before we start?
After a paper-pencil administration:
It is important that administrators verify that all questions have been answered as the scoring system does not allow for any questions to be left blank.
At the end of the assessment, administrators must collect all testing materials. Paper-pencil questionnaires need to be stored in a secure place and only be accessible to authorized individuals. Testing materials like questionnaires and reports need to be shredded by administrators to ensure appropriate disposal.



1.7.	Technical and security issues
Below are guidelines governing the security of administering the Professional Profile 2©. Guidelines ensure that every administration of the Professional Profile 2© is a pleasant, objective and fair process. Security specifications ensure that candidate information is protected both during administration and after assessment completion.


1.7.1.	Respecting the ethical charter

As a publisher of online assessment tools, Central Test respects the legal conventions of French labour law and the regulatory provisions resulting from the law of 6 January 1978 pertaining to information technology, files and freedoms: Declaration N°1834067.
Test results may not be forwarded to a third person without the explicit consent of the test candidate. A candidate has a right to access his/her results.
The assessor must grant him/her access automatically or when the candidate requests it.
The candidate has the right to request that all his/her personal data be permanently deleted. To do this, s/he must contact either the organisation directly, who will delete his/her data, or Central Test.


1.7.2.	Confidentiality and Security of user data

Central Test guarantees the security and confidentiality of data generated during the administration of online tests. Access codes are encrypted in the database and cannot be accessed by anyone. Passwords are computationally generated and are not visible to companies. A URL rewriting module (secure link generator) is installed and has transparent parameter passing for the user.
Browsing and data exchange via the Central Test application can be secured and encrypted using SSL. Secure browsing is guaranteed by the https protocol, which is represented by an icon in the form of a padlock in the internet browser. The Central Test application has a « GeoTrust SSL True BusinessID » digital signature, issued and certified by GeoTrust©. This certificate is irrefutable evidence of our serious attitude towards security and protects all Central Test assessments from phishing attacks. Invitations to take tests are made via secured links that are of limited use (in terms of numbers and duration). The tests are timed and IP addresses are tracked. Access to questionnaires may be limited in terms of numbers and duration.
 
1.7.3.	Hardware architecture and server availability

Central Test’s architecture consists of a network of 10 physical dedicated servers providing high-quality service.
Each server is housed in a specialised data centre featuring:
•	dedicated lines
•	a guaranteed bandwidth of 100Mbps (for each server)
•	redundant energy sources
•	4-hour Equipment Restoration Time
•	2-hour Incident Intervention Time
•	monitoring and assistance 24/7/365
Access to server administration is restricted by the IP address and is password-secured. Data exchanges are secure.

The Central Test application has been tested using the following browsers:
•	Internet Explorer 8 or above
•	Firefox 21 or above
•	Google Chrome 30 or above
•	Safari 7 or above


1.7.4.	Computer generated reports
Reports can be generated within minutes of candidates completing the questionnaire. The Professional Profile 2© report is user friendly, customisable and available in several languages. Report content can be tailored depending on the needs of the administrator. Separate reports may be configured for the candidate and the company, recruiter, coach or psychologist. Reports are available in PDF format.



1.8.	Supply, conditions and availability
Conditions of supply and availability for the Professional Profile 2© vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply:
•	The Professional Profile 2© is only available for Psychologists, HR practitioners and coaches.
•	Training is compulsory prior to use and distribution.
•	This manual is available to individuals who have been trained to use the Professional Profile 2©.
•	The Professional Profile 2© can be ordered online, or by contacting any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide (customer@centraltest.com).
•	For information on Professional Profile 2© prices and related products and services, contact any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide.
•	For more information on the training, please contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central Test's partners.
 
2.	Conceptual & Practical Scale Development
Professional Profile 2© was developed using robust theoretical concepts, practical and relevant work requirements and advanced scientific analyses. Unlike other work-based personality assessments, the item bank for the questionnaire was primarily derived from recruiter surveys, job board analyses and HR and training practitioner feedback. This empirically–based practitioner approach has resulted in the development of an administrator-friendly, work-relevant, valid assessment that candidates enjoy taking. All items in the item bank were piloted and pre-tested with professionals from four continents (North America, Europe, East Asia and Australasia) in order to ensure assessed work behaviours were contemporary, global and culture-free.



2.1.	Theoretical background
2.1.1.	The history and value of psychometric testing to personnel assessment
Historically, the Latin origin of the word personality (persona) referred to masks worn to represent roles that actors interpreted. Today, the term covers psychological characteristics common to all human beings and is used to explain human nature and individual differences. Analysis of individual differences dates back to 460-377BC, when Hippocrates proposed a biological model of personality arguing that temperament can be used to identify key human behaviours. This generated the first classification of personality as individuals were categorised as sanguine, phlegmatic, melancholic or choleric, that corresponded to traits of optimistic, relaxed, analytical or irritable respectively.

Considered the father of psychometrics, Sir Francis Galton (1884) was the first scientist to analyse the structure of personality using a lexical hypothesis. The lexical hypothesis is one of the most widely used underlying theories of personality and rests on two arguments; a) personality characteristics that are most important in people’s lives will eventually become a part of their language; and b) more important personality characteristics are more likely to be encoded within language as a single word. This lexical hypothesis was used by Gordon Allport (1937) to generate a list of 17,953 unique terms to describe personality. Allport was the first to use the term “personality” in its modern application and produce an understandable classification of human traits that led to the clustering and later factor structure of personality traits by Raymond Cattell (1957)and Costa & McCrae (1985).

In the business world of the 21st century, psychometric measurement tools are increasingly used in the workplace as they help to predict behaviour and performance in a reliable way. Across the globe organisations utilise personality and ability assessments to make personnel decisions for recruitment, selection, promotion and development. Unlike judgements based on subjective perceptions, such as those derived from traditional job interviews, psychometric assessments offer a more objective, fair, reliable, valid and legally-defensible approach to identifying desired work behaviours. The measurement of personality represents a key component in identifying individuals who are best suited for particular situations, contexts and planned objectives as individual values, interests, preferences and abilities represent core composites of personality. Therefore the use of personality assessment is integral to any process where the individual is central to productivity (Cruise, 2012).


2.1.2.	Personality and employee effectiveness
An assessment can be called psychometric insofar as it is standardised, applicable across groups and has proven reliability and validity. Personality testing remains one of the best predictors of both job performance and training potential and is certainly a better measure of ‘fit’ than traditional interviews (Barrick & Mount, 1991; Robertson & Smith, 2001). Approaches to personality developed over the last 30 years have focused on accurately measuring individual behaviour in a professional context. The link between personality and work success has been long established with several studies showing that personality is a predictor of job performance (De Fruyt & Mervielde, 1999; Hurtz & Donovan, 2000; Salgado, 1997).
 
One study that has significantly influenced the use of personality tests in the workplace was conducted by Barrick and Mount (1991). Using the Five Factor Model (FFM) of personality (see page 21 for detailed description of the FFM), they found personality dimensions accurately predicted at least one aspect of performance at work in a variety of jobs including professionals, police, managers, sales staff, and skilled/semi-skilled workers. Another study showed that Extraversion and Conscientiousness predict job performance (De Fruyt & Mervielde, 1999), whilst Extraversion and Openness are positively related to job performance and creativity and higher levels of Neuroticism have a negative effect on individual work success (Rothmann & Coetzer, 2003).

Secondly, evidence has linked personality to social and emotional components of work such as social investment at work (Hudson, Roberts, & Lodi-Smith, 2012); job satisfaction (Christiansen, Sliter, & Frost, 2014a; Heller, Ferris, Brown, & Watson, 2009; Lam & Ozorio, 2012) and job commitment (Panaccio & Vandenberghe, 2012). For example, Christiansen et al. (2014), found individuals with lower levels of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness reported more distress while performing tasks related to those traits, whilst employees with higher levels of Neuroticism perceived tasks related to Extraversion as most stressful. Furthermore Mathieu (2013) found that narcissism was positively related to Extraversion and negatively related to Agreeableness and had a significant influence on job satisfaction. Findings are important for HR professionals in light of the high financial costs associated with employee satisfaction and turnover.

Thirdly, the relationship between personality and leadership has also been confirmed. De Vries (2012) for example found that personality predicts different leadership styles. Using the HEXACO personality model (Lee & Ashton, 2004), results showed direct effects of Honesty-Humility on ethical leadership; Extraversion on charismatic leadership, Agreeableness on supportive leadership and Conscientiousness on task- oriented leadership. Similarly, using the FFM model of personality, Craik et al. (2002) found Conscientiousness and Openness were characteristic of a strategic management style; Extraversion, Openness and lower levels of Agreeableness were typical of an interpersonal management style; and Extraversion and Openness were indicators of managerial potential. Due to its effect on CEO leadership, personality is therefore indirectly related to organisational effectiveness (Colbert, Barrick, & Bradley, 2014).

Fourthly, personality plays an important role in team settings. Interpersonal team-work behaviour is predicted by Agreeableness (Tasa, Sears, & Schat, 2011). However, while people who score high on Agreeableness tend to be great team players, they are less well suited to “fill the role of devil’s advocate” (LePine, Buckman, Crawford, & Methot, 2011). Researchers have also found that team-member- exchange engagement was related to higher levels of Extraversion but lower levels of Neuroticism (Liao, Yang, Wang, Drown, & Shi, 2013). With team fit being a key ingredient in modern organisational success, identifying individuals with personality traits that compliment business agenda is a primary concern for HR professionals.

Finally, personality is also linked to negative employee work behaviours. Brown et al. (2010) for example, found evidence that ethical decision making is not solely based on education but related to personality factors such as narcissism and empathy, whilst Kalshoven, Den Hartog & De Hoogh (2010) found Conscientiousness, Agreeableness and Emotional Stability to be related to ethical leadership. Furthermore, while organisational citizenship behaviours (voluntary extra role behaviours) are related to individual Agreeableness, Emotionality, Openness to Experience and low Honesty-Humility (Bourdage, Lee, Lee, & Shin, 2012); dark personality traits (avoidant and narcissistic) are negative predictors of transformational leadership (Khoo & Burch, 2008). Negative personality traits particularly affect customer service experiences and harm overall performance of organisations. Furthermore, Harris and Ogbonna (2009) proposed that employees who deliberately sabotaged firms were generally Thrill Seekers, Apathetics, Customer Revengers and Money Grabbers. These findings emphasise the financial, social and psychological costs of selecting employees who poorly fit with roles, teams and organisations.


2.1.3.	Different approaches to personality: type versus trait
There are two main approaches to classifying individuals in personality psychology: type versus trait approach. Type theories categorise personality as a set of interrelated elements that make an individual unique. People are assigned to discrete categories of personality that are different to each other (e.g.
 
introversion – extraversion). Types express preferences that allow us to predict behaviour, understand changes in behaviour over time and identify how behaviours may be developed with intervention. Type theories regard opposing traits as two distinct classes and are therefore appropriate assessments for workplace development, career guidance and coaching.

Trait theories on the other hand, regard personality as degrees of expression along a continuum of behaviour. A trait could be defined as the tendency to act in a certain way and could be expressed by the behaviour of the individual in diverse situations (Nadeau, Acier, Miranda, Pervin, & John, 2004). For instance, when someone is described as a kind person it means that s/he tends to behave in a kind way, regardless of the situation. Trait approaches are commonly used in work assessments as they are effective predictors of stable behaviour. It is expected that a rigorous person will be a rigorous employee. For recruitment purposes, trait theories are recommended over type theories as they give a more detailed description of an individual’s potential instead of allocating unique individuals to a limited number of personality types.

The Five Factor Model (FFM) of personality is considered the standard in trait personality measurement as it represents well researched global personality traits. The model is comprised of: Openness - the extent to which an individual is intellectually curious, has insight and is imaginative; Conscientiousness - the extent to which an individual is reliable, persistent and ambitious; Extraversion - the inclination to be sociable, desiring to be among others, thus requiring excitement and stimulation; Agreeableness - the tendency to be humanistic, cooperative and trusting of others; and Neuroticism - the inclination to feel negative emotions including fear, guilt, sadness and anger (John & Srivastava, 1999; Major, Turner, & Fletcher, 2006; Mooradian, Renzl, & Matzler, 2006). The Professional Profile 2© adopts the trait approach and measures stable personality traits in the workplace. The assessment allows practitioners to identify qualities such as ambition, desire to lead, or emotional resilience required for specific roles.


“A musician must make music, an artist must paint, a poet must write, if he is to be ultimately at peace with himself. What a man can be, he must be.”
Abraham Maslow, (1954) pg. 93




2.1.4.	Personality theories used in the Professional Profile 2©
In addition to the Five Factor Model (FFM) of personality, several established theories were used for the conceptual and practical development of the Professional Profile 2©. Other theoretical frameworks include C.G. Jung (1971) Theory of Psychological Types; William Schutz (1958) Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation; Lee and Ashton(2004) HEXACO Model of Personality and J. Holland (1958) Occupational Themes (RIASEC). A combined theoretical approach was adopted in order to ensure conceptual richness, practical pertinence and prevent content restriction that may result from a single model.

2.1.4.a	Theory of Psychological Types – Carl G. Jung (1921)
In 1921, Carl Gustav Jung categorised humans according to two attitude types (Extraversion - Introversion) and four functions. Functions describe how people perceive their environment (Sensation – Intuition) and how they judge what they perceive (Thinking – Feeling). Jung argued that much of behaviour that appears random is actually orderly and consistent due to differences in the way individuals prefer to use perception and judgement (Perceiving – Judging). For example, people who process information through Sensation will pay close attention to details, whereas an individual who perceives through Intuition will rely more on broad patterns. Individuals who tend to make use of the Thinking function base their judgments more on logic, whereas individuals with a preference for the Feeling function tend to make judgments based on personal values (Arnau, Green, Rosen, Gleaves, & Melancon, 2003). The combination of attitude type and functions results in 16 different personality types.
 
For the development of dimensions and items on the Professional Profile 2©, how individuals judge what they see, make decisions and process information are considered key components for success at work.


2.1.4.b	Fundamental Interpersonal Relations Orientation (FIRO) – William Schutz (1958)
Schutz (1958) proposed that humans have three interpersonal needs; a need for inclusion, affection and control. The theory is based on the belief that when people get together to form a group there are three main interpersonal needs that they are looking to obtain. Inclusion – relates to whether an individual tends to include others in interaction or want others to include them and be recognised. Affection – refers to how an individual relates to others and how much someone invests in a relationship or desires another to demonstrate affection towards him/her. Control – differentiates between people who desire to be dominated and guided and those who prefer to be leading and take responsibility. Needs are either wanted or expressed by individuals when interacting with others. This results in six different dimensions namely: Expressed Inclusion (EI), Wanted Inclusion (WI), Expressed Affection (EA), Wanted Affection (WA), Expressed Control (EC) and Wanted Control (WC). The FIRO was included in the development of the Professional Profile 2©, as how much interaction an employee wants in the areas of socialising, leadership and responsibilities will inform organisations about an individual’s potential team fit, culture fit and leadership effectiveness.


2.1.4.c	HEXACO Model of Personality – Lee and Ashton(2004)
Lee and Ashton (2004) proposed a 6-dimension, trait-based model of personality based on evidence of previous research on trait-based personality models. The model includes all dimensions measured by the FFM as well as the additional dimension of Honesty-Humility (H). Within the model dimensions are classified as: Honesty-Humility (H) – measures facets of sincerity, fairness, greed avoidance and modesty. Emotionality (E) – assesses fearfulness, anxiety, dependence and sentimentality. Extraversion (X) – identifies social self-esteem, social boldness, sociability and liveliness. Agreeableness (A) – measures forgiveness, gentleness, flexibility and patience. Conscientiousness (C) – assesses organisation, diligence, perfectionism and prudence. Openness to Experience (O) – examines an individual’s tendency towards aesthetic appreciation, inquisitiveness, creativity and unconventionality. For the development of the Professional Profile 2©, facets measured by the (H) dimension of HEXACO were important as an individual’s values and expression of said values significantly influence role, team and organisational fit as well as his/her approach to making decisions.


2.1.4.d	RIASEC Career Interest Model John Holland (1958)
Psychologist John Holland argued that the choice of a vocation is an expression of personality and the closer the match between an individual’s personality type and chosen profession, the more successful and satisfied the individual will be. Holland therefore demonstrated the link between vocational environment and personality and developed a career interest model called RIASEC – an acronym for six personality types. Types are described as: Realistic (Doers) - those who prefer things to ideas or people. They are generally independent, stable, genuine and practical. Investigative (Thinkers) – individuals who tend to enjoy solving problems and conducting research. They are generally analytical, rational and prioritise intellectual or scientific activities. Artistic (Creators) – those who prefer to work with ideas, abstractions and concepts. They are generally, creative, sensitive, expressive and intuitive. Social (Helpers) – individuals who prefer tasks that help, support or teach others. They are generally caring, cooperative, empathetic and friendly. Enterprising (Persuaders) – those who prefer work that involves leadership, politics, business and public-speaking. They are generally ambitious, assertive, confident and risk-taking. Conventional (Organisers) – individuals who value precision and accuracy. They are generally efficient, thorough, orderly and detail-oriented. The RIASEC model was included in the development of the Professional Profile 2© given documented evidence on the financial, productivity and psychological costs associated with employee turnover, negative work behaviours and poor performance. Understanding employee career preferences is important for HR and recruitment professionals to identify and manage individuals who are poorly suited for specific roles, tasks and environments. Whilst these six
 
categories are not definitive of the types of people that exist, they do allow a simple ordering of vocational personalities. Figure 4 depict the hexagonal model of the RIASEC framework.




Figure 4. Holland’s (1977) RIASEC Model of Occupational Themes


2.1.5.	Motivations and values in the workplace
The relationship between individual values, motivations and work success has been long documented. Several theories point to the role of motivation and values in determining an individual’s life goals, the decisions s/he makes and explains why individuals behave in certain ways on a day to day basis.

Values are principles or standards of behaviour that govern one’s judgement of what is important in life. Sociologist Morris Massey (1979) argued that values are formed during three periods: a) The Imprint Period – until the age of seven our values are blindly absorbed from our parents; b) The Modelling Period – lasts between seven and approximately thirteen years of age, other sources such as teachers and role models influence our values and we try to imitate others; c) The Socialization Period – during adolescence and early adulthood (13 to 21 years) we are mainly influenced by our peers and actively seek others who are like us and share our values. Developed personal values therefore influence our attitudes and behaviours as they determine what we consider appropriate, right or wrong.

Values may be considered as long-term objectives that develop and adapt as a result of life experience. Important values influence our decision-making and the way we experience our surroundings. Finegan (2000) suggests a multidimensional approach based on two sets of factors: Humanity Factors such as courtesy, consideration, cooperation, fairness, forgiveness and moral integrity; and Vision Factors such as development, initiative, creativity and openness. An organisation that values both Vision and Humanity factors is likely to be perceived positively, and accordingly, employees are more likely to be affectively committed. However, this effect only occurs when employees attach importance to these values. Job applicants tend to look for companies that share the same values (Anderson, Fornell, & Mazvancheryl, 2004; Barnard, 1968; Chatman, 1989; Schneider, 1987).

The relationship between employee values and job performance was established from as early as 1956 (Pelz) when it was found that employees working in medical research who had a strong emphasis on science-related values showed higher levels of performance. Current research indicates that employees who report a high value congruence with their organisation are generally more satisfied with their job (Amos & Weathington, 2008). High value congruence also leads to organisational commitment and lower intent to quit (Kristof-Brown, Zimmerman, & Johnson, 2005; Meglino, Ravlin, & Adkins, 1989). However, if
 
there is a mismatch between these values, strain occurs and employees are more likely to become stressed (Edwards, 1996). Thus it is necessary for organisations to be able to communicate their values in order to succeed.

Motivation is the desire or willingness to do something and provides underlying reasons for an individual behaving in a particular way. Motivation influences emotional, social and cognitive forces that lead to behaviour. There are two types of motivation: Extrinsic and Intrinsic. Extrinsic motivation refers to factors external to the individual that influence their beliefs, attitudes, decisions and behaviours. In the context of work, extrinsic motivators include salary, job perks/benefits, status and work conditions. Intrinsic motivation, on the other hand, refers to behaviour that is driven by internal rewards or feelings of personal satisfaction unique to an individual. In the context of work, intrinsic motivators include recognition, challenging work, purposeful work, achievement and opportunities for personal growth. In the Professional Profile 2©, values and motivations are considered essential to determine how individuals are likely to behave at work, the type of tasks that will keep him/her driven and satisfied, and the work environment s/he is likely to flourish in.

Research on the relationship between employee motivation and job and organisational success is extensive. There is clear evidence establishing a link between motivation and employee job performance (Alonso & Lewis, 2001; Bright, 2007; Locke & Latham, 2002; Locke, Shaw, Saari, & Latham, 1981); retention (Rainlall, 2004) and work attitudes (Kovach, 1995; Porter, Bigley, & Steers, 2003). With the recruitment and loss of talented employees associated with high financial and productivity costs, identifying motivated employees remain a primary objective of HR practitioners.


2.1.6.	Motivations and values theories used in the Professional Profile 2©
Several established motivation and values theories were used for the conceptual and practical development of the Professional Profile 2©; these included A. Maslow’s (1943) Theory of Human Motivation; Value-based Decision-making model (VBDM) based on E. Spranger’s (1928) values; and S. Schwartz’s (2012) Value Theory.


2.1.6.a	Theory of Human Motivation – Abraham Maslow (1943)
What makes us choose one activity over another? What causes us to act in a particular way and what makes us go to work? Motivation, consciously or unconsciously, triggers action and is considered as the origin of individual behaviour. In 1943, Abraham Maslow theorised that individuals have universal needs at work, which were sources of motivation. Needs can be classified in a pyramid to visualise the order in which they appear in an individual. Maslow argued that satisfaction of needs at lower levels elicit needs at the next level and concluded that humans can only reach the top of the pyramid if lower-level needs were satisfied. Figure 5 depicts Maslow’s theory of motivation and hierarchy of needs.

There are several theories of need-based motivation, with the majority agreeing on three key points:
i.	The existence of needs. Individuals feel basic needs which they seek to satisfy. These needs induce action.
ii.	The existence of objectives. Individuals are motivated to take action in order to achieve a goal.
iii.	Motivation is a personal phenomenon. Individuals do not have the same needs or problems nor solve them in the same way. Therefore both needs and motivation are individual.
 
 

Figure 5. Maslow’s Theory of Motivation and Hierarchy of Needs


2.1.6.b	Value-Based Decision-Making – Eduard Spranger (1928)
In his seminal book Types of Men, Eduard Spranger (1928) proposed six types of personal values that form part of an individual’s thinking and help us to choose between alternatives during the decision making process. Values, he argued, allow us to analyse and refine judgement. Values in the workplace are important as they reduce conflict between organisational members (Courtney, 2001) and effectively lead to the management of organisational knowledge, particularly during periods of restructuring and change (Hall, Guo, & Davis, 2003).

Values are categorised as follows: Theoretical - refers to comprehension of the truth and knowledge that has been attained in a rational, scientific manner. Social - relates to a philanthropic view as represented by a search for social interaction and being aware of the impact of our decisions on other people, groups, and organisations. Political - concerns a power-oriented view in relation to the prestige and power that could arise at the cost of others. Religious - this value aspires to make the world a better place. It is usually based on philosophical and interpretative views. Aesthetic - views the world through an artistic, interpretative view and seeks to find form and harmony in a given setting. Economic - refers to the search for usability and material goods. It arises from a functional, practical view.


2.1.6.c	Value Theory – Shalom Schwartz (2012)
According to Shalom Schwartz (2012), values are concepts or beliefs that relate to a purpose or desirable behaviour. They transcend specific situations and reflect motivations designed to achieve specific objectives, such as safety, performance and autonomy. Values guide our choices and allow the evaluation of behaviour towards people or events. Schwartz conducted extensive research and identified 10 cross cultural value types. Power relates to the need for a prestigious social status and is related to values of authority, wealth, social power, public image and social recognition. Achievement is characterised by personal success and is related to values of ambition, orientation towards success, competence, influence and self-respect. Stimulation is the desire for variety in order to maintain an optimum level of activity and is related to values of audacity, an exciting and varied life. Hedonism is the need for pleasure and satisfaction and is related to values of pleasure, love life, having fun. Universalism is the understanding, tolerance and protection of the welfare of the whole world and nature. Related values include equality, a world at peace, tolerance and social justice. Benevolence is the maintenance of the welfare of people with whom one is in personal contact and is related to values of helpfulness, loyalty, honesty and responsibility. Tradition is commitment and approval of the customs and ideas advocated by traditional culture or religion. Related values included respect for tradition, humility, spiritual life and moderation. Conformity moderates actions, trends and desires that upset, hurt others or violate
 
social norms. The emphasis here is on self-control in the interactions of everyday life with relatives. Related values are obedience, politeness, self-discipline, and honouring parents and elders. Security is characterized by the pursuit of harmony and stability within society, relationships and the self. Some values of this type are essentially individual interests (such as being healthy) and others are community interests (such as national security). Related values relate to maintaining social order, family safety, and cleanliness. Self-Direction is the independence of thought and action, characterised by choosing, creating and exploring. Related values are creativity, freedom and independence.

Table 1 details the Professional Profile 2© dimensions mapped onto corresponding dimensions of established psychological theories and frameworks.
 
Table 1
Professional Profile 2© dimensions mapped onto other psychological theoretical frameworks

	Professional Profile 2© Dimensions	Corresponding Dimension	Reference Model/Framework
	Personality		
1.	Flexibility/ Firmness	Thinking/Feeling Agreeableness	Theory of Psychological Type (Jung, 1921) FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
2.	Extraversion/Introversion	Extraversion/Introversion	Theory of Psychological Type (Jung, 1921) FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
3.	Focus on Facts/Intuition	Sensing/Intuition	Theory of Psychological Type (Jung, 1921)
4.	Improvisation/Structure	Enterprising/Conventional Conscientiousness	RIASEC (Holland, 1958)
FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
	Persuasiveness/ Straightforwardness	Honesty/Humility	HEXACO (Lee & Ashton, 2004)
5.			
6.	Emotional distance/ Emotional sensitivity	Artistic
Emotional Stability Emotionality	RIASEC (Holland, 1958)
FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985) HEXACO (Lee & Ashton, 2004)
7.	Rule-following/ Free-thinking	Judging/Perceiving Openness	Theory of Psychological Type (Jung, 1956) FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
	Motivation		
1.	Ambition/Humility	Achievement Need Achievement Political	Motivation Theory (Maslow, 1943) Value Theory (Schwartz, 2012) VBDM (Spranger, 1928)
2.	Autonomy/Team work	Social Need Social/Artistic	Motivation Theory (Maslow, 1943) RIASEC (Holland, 1958)
3.	Altruism/Individualism	Religious Achievement Need Social Agreeableness	VBDM (Spranger, (1928) Motivation Theory (Maslow, 1943) RIASEC (Holland, 1958)
FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
4.	Need for action/Need for reflection	Practical Investigative/Realistic
Extraversion/Introversion	VBDM (Spranger (1928)
RIASEC (Holland, 1958)
FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
5.	Novelty seeking/Familiarity seeking	Investigative/Artistic Openness	RIASEC (Holland, 1958)
FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985)
6.	Desire to lead/Desire for guidance	Power Control
Achievement Need	Value Theory (Schwartz, 2012) FIRO (Schutz, 1958)
Motivation Theory (Maslow, 1943)
7.	Involvement at work/ Personal balance	Emotional Stability Hedonism	FFM (Costa & McCrae, 1985) VBDM (Spranger, (1928)
 
2.2.	Development of Professional Profile 2©
The Professional Profile 2© was developed from a thorough multi-stage process. The precursor to the questionnaire was first developed in 2002 – a time in which the structure of work was more defined and targeted work competencies more predictable. However, work in the twenty-first century is characterised by more flexible ways of working, cross-cultural team work, technological innovation and more complex performance indicators. Questionnaire items and dimensions were therefore revamped in order to ensure; a) items reflected contemporary ways of working; b) effective prevention of faking and social bias; c) practitioners had a tool that improved the accuracy of assessment decisions; and d) individuals were clearly guided when assessing fit with desired roles and careers.


2.2.1.	Dimensions and Item Construction
The Professional Profile 2© was developed from the bank of items for the original professional profile questionnaire. The original questionnaire underwent review that resulted from client interviews, training workshop feedback forms and advertised job competences. The original questionnaire assessed 12 dimensions from 98 questions, presented as paired statements (the equivalent of 196 items). Questions were divided into two sections: Part A comprised of 74 paired statements in which respondents chose the statement that best reflected them. Part B consisted of 24 paired adjectives or descriptors that required the respondent to choose a single response from the pair. A practitioner-based review ensured dimensions identified were clearly defined and items targeting each dimension accurately reflected modern and business-relevant behaviours. There were three primary recommendations for changes:

i.	Greater differentiation between personality and motivation dimensions
ii.	Inclusion of dimensions that target organisational and team fit
iii.	Clearer item structure and wording
This practitioner review process was followed by item and dimension review by a team of ten (10) experts comprised of Human Resource managers, recruitment consultants and psychologists. Items were grouped into themes and categorised into global dimensions generated from literature reviews of practitioner and academic research on personality, motivation, values and attitudes in the workplace. This process produced two additional dimensions; free-thinking/ rule following and familiarity seeking/ novelty seeking.

New and amended items for the Professional Profile 2© were written simultaneously in simple French and English to promote ease of response as well as facilitate candidates’ mental connection and understanding with statements. As the questionnaire aimed to capture work-behaviours in multiple contexts, items were checked for cultural bias, clarity, offensiveness and language accuracy. Two examples of changed items resulting from this process are depicted in Table 2 below.


Table 2

Examples of changed items resulting from expert review and practitioner feedback

Dimension	Original Item	Professional Profile 2©

Team Work/ Autonomy	
I find it stimulating to work in a team	
I prefer working closely with others
Flexibility/ Firmness	I try to avoid power struggles	I try to find my way out of disagreements
 
2.2.2.	Ipsative Response Format
Response options for the Items on the Professional Profile 2© are written in binary forced-choice format. In contrast to Likert-scales, respondents choose between descriptors according to the extent to which the descriptor captures their preference. Ipsative formats have been found to reduce response bias (Chan, 2003; Saville & Willson, 1991; ten Holt, van Duijn, & Boomsma, 2010). The fact that respondents cannot endorse all items eliminates acquiescence (the tendency to agree with all items on a questionnaire), reduces susceptibility to impression management and means that it is generally more difficult to fake (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011a). Ipsative formats make it impossible to provide the same response on all items, thereby resulting in greater differentiation of scores within a profile. Ipsative scales are also beneficial because there is no need to include negatively-worded items in order to balance dimensions. Rather, mirrored items facilitate measurement of behaviours for different traits along the same domains. In Likert scales, it is necessary to include negatively-worded items in order to balance responses and monitor acquiescence (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2013; Edwards & Kenney, 1946). With ipsative formats, all items are worded positively yet both positive and negative behavioural indicators are captured.

Despite such advantages, ipsative questionnaires are underutilised in work-based assessments due to challenges for traditional normative scoring methodology, construct validation and interpretation (Cornwell & Dunlap, 1994; Loo, 1999; Meade, 2004).

In an ipsative test, the respondent must make a comparative judgement between two or more items to give an answer. Conversely, in a normative test, judgement is viewed in absolute terms for each evaluated personality trait and preferences are not compared between different traits. Classic test theory (CTT) scoring does not reflect the psychological process of comparison, as it ignores the fact that respondents indicate a preference not an absolute judgement. As a consequence, ipsative test scores that are generated from CTT scoring approaches might be distorted. The potential solution therefore is to keep the ipsative format but change the way the scores are calculated, in order to reflect realistic comparative judgements.


2.2.3.	Thurstonian Item Response Theory (IRT) and Ipsative Responses
To solve the problem of ipsative scoring, researchers relied on the work of Thurstone (1927, 1931) who proposed the law of comparative judgements, which assigns the result of a comparative judgment to the "relative utility" of objects compared for each individual. Applied to personality assessment, the notion of utility refers to the degree to which there is a match between the item and the personality trait of the respondent. Therefore, an individual will choose the item that corresponds to them the most.

Despite its potential benefits, Thurstonian models were previously not utilised in ipsative test as (Brown, 2010):
i.	There was no efficient estimation method available
ii.	Computer technology was not powerful enough to facilitate analysis
iii.	Previous statistical programmes did not facilitate the calculation of scores because the variance of error for each question is 0

Recent changes were made to the Thurstonian second order model to produce the Thurstonian IRT model (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011, 2013). This model bypasses the notion of latent utility, and directly connects the choice made by the respondents to the latent personality traits measured by the test. This change simplifies the model and allows for it to be applied to much longer questionnaires.

Brown & Maydeu-Olivares (2011, 2013) showed that when applied to an ipsative questionnaire with blocks of four items, this method allows not only to correct the distortion of the scores, but also to recover the levels of "absolute" personality traits from responses based on comparative judgements. The scores provided were similar to those of a normative test.
The nature of this scoring procedure, based on the Maximum a posteriori estimator (MAP), was completely different from that of the CTT, which "adds" the dimension points for each selected item. MAP is an estimation procedure which has the goal to find a parameter value theta (the value on the latent trait
 
continuum) that best explains the data (the pattern of binary outcome responses) by assuming a joint distribution on both, the data and the theta, with theta governing the distribution on the data (i.e. the posterior distribution). More simply, with the Maximum a posteriori estimator, the overall response pattern of the test is taken into account for the calculation of the score. By comparing the choice and preference indicated by the respondent while taking into account the specific characteristics of the items, the method is able to deduce (or recover) their absolute level of personality trait for each dimension.

For the Professional Profile 2©, Thurstonian IRT was used to revise, rewrite and validate both items and dimensions. Figure 6 displays the model of Thurstonian IRT used to analyse items and dimensions on the questionnaire.




Figure 6. Model of Thurstonian IRT analyses utilised in the development of the Professional Profile 2©


2.2.3. a Item facility
Item facility refers to an item’s ability to differentiate between respondents and identify floor or ceiling effects. An item has floor or ceiling effects when the probability of endorsing a response option is much lower or greater than the probability of endorsing the alternate option. As items for the Professional Profile 2© were binary, item facility was examined from the proportion of responses for each option. The more equivalent the proportion the more balanced the item. For the Professional Profile 2©, items with floor or ceiling effects were discarded or modified. The facility of changed or new items was then examined with subsequent pre-tests.


2.2.3. b Item difficulty & discrimination
Item difficulty is the first parameter of an IRT model. It is defined as the location on the ability continuum, where the probability of endorsing the item is equal to 50% of the participants. In a personality assessment, the difficulty parameter reflects the level of trait needed for participants to have a 50% chance of choosing the item. An item is said to be “easy” when the probability that 50% of individuals who endorsed it only have a low level on the trait measured by the item (e.g. an “easy” item measuring Extraversion might be chosen by 50% of participants having only a low level of trait for Extraversion). On the contrary, an item is said to be “difficult”, when the probability that 50% of individuals who endorsed it have a high level of trait (e.g. a “difficult” item measuring Extraversion might reach the probability of being chosen by 50% of the participants only if they have a high level of trait for Extraversion).

Item difficulty can be visualised on the Item characteristic curves (ICC). The ICC is an S-shaped curve that represents the relationship between ability levels of the latent trait and the probability of endorsing an item. It is obtained by modelling the probability of endorsing the items using logistic model (see figure 7).
 
 


Figure 7. Item characteristic curves of an easy, moderate and difficult item from an ability test; the probability that 50% of the participants chose the correct answer can be observed when the ability level is -1.3 for the easy item, 0 for the moderately difficult item and 1.4 for the difficult item (the ability level is represented as a Z score, 0 being the mean).


Item discrimination is the second parameter of the IRT model and refers to the shape of the curve. It is a measure of an item’s ability to distinguish between respondents on the target construct. A high discrimination parameter value reflects a high ability to differentiate between participants; the probability of choosing the correct answer (or endorsing the item for a personality assessment) increases more rapidly as the ability (or level of trait) increases.

As the Thurstonian IRT model is conceptualised from a factor analysis perspective, item difficulty is referred to as "threshold" instead of "difficulty” and item discrimination parameter as “factor loadings”. Factor loadings and threshold were examined for all Items. Items that were too difficult, too easy or did not discriminate enough were modified or removed.


	c Item and Dimension Reliability
Item reliability is the degree to which items on a questionnaire have no error. The reliability of an item is determined by the internal consistency of the item and its relationship with other items that measure the same dimension. Internal reliability was measured using composite reliability generated from item factor loadings. Composite reliability ranges from 0 to 1 with a recommended coefficient of 0.7. For the Professional Profile 2©, items with the smallest factor loadings were changed or deleted. Modified questionnaires were then trialled with successive pre-tests.


	Pre-tests and Pilots
Pre-tests were conducted with a range of male and female professionals across the globe to ensure items were accurate, relevant, clear, concise, culture-free, bias-free and reflected targeted work behaviours. After 2 French and 2 English pre-tests, the final questionnaire was piloted with 345 English-speaking professionals from the United States and 209 French-speaking professionals from France. Pre-test samples comprised of native French and English speakers from different continents in order to establish the questionnaire as an international measure of work personality and motivation. Unlike other personality
 
measures, the Professional Profile 2© was developed to ensure items were culturally equivalent from the early stages of development, rather than focus on cultural adaption after the questionnaire’s validity has been established within a single context – the typical practice of test developers. Tables 4 and 5 detail sample characteristics of all pre-tests and pilots conducted for French and English working-age samples.

Composite reliabilities for each dimension were calculated from generated item factor loadings. Dimensions were flagged if reliabilities were less than 0.55. Dimensions that did not converge were inspected for poorly-performing items which were then reviewed, modified or changed then subjected to another round of pre-test. The overall scale composite reliability for the Pilot study was .998 (France) and .990 (USA). Composite reliability for personality dimensions ranged from .663 – 1.00 (France) and .768
-1.00 (USA), whilst reliability for motivation dimensions ranged from .832 – 1.00 (France) and .683 - .892 (USA). As shown in Table 3, dimensions not emerging as valid did not produce item loadings therefore reliabilities were not calculated. Detailed information on the validity of each domain for each pre-test can be seen in Chapter 6- Validity.


Table 3

Dimension reliabilities for French and English Pre-tests and Pilots for the Professional Profile 2©

		P1	P2	P3	P4	P5	P6	P7	M1	M2	M3	M4	M5	M6	M7
	Pre-test 1 (N=143)	.795	.647	.758	.756	.579	.793	.643	.817	.982	.995	.851	.983	.864	1.00

French	Pre-test 2 (N=189)	.934	.978	.920	.893	.817	.746	1.00	.645	.657	.737	.756	.876	.718	.730
	Pilot (N=209)	.663	.971	.861	1.00	1.00	.992	.943	.949	.985	1.00	.932	1.00	.832	.978
	Pre-test 1
(N= 105)	.729	.971	.487	.549	.861	.843	.799			No convergence		

English	Pre-test 2(N=118)			No convergence			.996	.929	1.00	1.00	.882	.968	.910
	Pilot (N=345)	.995	.890	.965	.869	.768	.839	1.00	.684	.764	.784	.683	.745	.892	.869

P1 – Flexibility/Firmness P2 – Extraversion/Introversion P3 – Focus on facts/Intuition P4 – Improvisation/Structure P5 – Persuasiveness/Straightforwardness P6 – Emotional distance/Emotional sensitivity P7 – Rule-following/Free-thinking M1 – Ambition/Humility M2 – Autonomy/Team work M3 – Altruism/Individualism M4 – Need for reflection/Need for action M5 – Novelty seeking/Familiarity seeking M6 – Desire to lead/Desire for guidance M7 – Involvement at work/Personal balance
 
Table 4

Sample characteristics for pre-tests and pilot samples used to develop the Professional Profile 2© - French

Pre-Tests and Pilots Sample Characteristics
	Gender (% male)	Age	Ethnic Composition	Occupational Composition

Pre-test	1 (N=143)	
30.77%	
(M=40.08; SD =10.30)

Range 20-68 years	
88.81 % - French Europe
04.20 % - French Africa
03.50 % - French North
America
03.50 % - French Other	
14.69% - Manual and semi-skilled workers
17.48% - Entrepreneurs and specialist professionals 09.79% - Junior executives (business administration, sales) 02.10% - Retirees & Househusbands or housewives
34.27% - Senior executives (civil service, business, intellectual or artistic professions)
04.20% - Technical and skilled workers 11.19% - Unemployed
06.29% - University students

Pre-test 2 (N=189)	
37.03 %	
(M= 37.09; SD = 10.02)

Range 19-67 years	
82.54 % - French Europe
13.23 % - French Africa
01.06 % - French North
America 03.17% - French Other	
15.87% - Manual and semi-skilled workers
15.34% - Entrepreneurs and specialist professionals 10.05% - Junior executives (business administration, sales)
30.16% - Senior executives (civil service, business, intellectual or artistic professions)
07.94% - Technical and skilled workers 12.70% - Unemployed
07.41% - University students 00.53% - Service providers (B2C)

French				

Pilot (N=209)	
34.45%	
(M=41.89; SD =10.48)

Range 23- 65 years	
100% - French Europe	
15.31% - Manual and semi-skilled workers
15.79% - Entrepreneurs and specialist professionals 06.70% - Junior executives (business administration, sales) 01.44% - Retirees & Househusbands or housewives
40.67% - Senior executives (civil service, business, intellectual or artistic professions)
05.26% - Technical and skilled workers 09.09% - Unemployed
04.78% - University students 00.96% - Service providers (B2C)

 
Table 5

Sample characteristics for pre-tests and pilot samples used to develop the Professional Profile 2© - English

Pre-Tests and Pilots Sample Characteristics
	
Pre-test 1
(N= 105)	
50.48%	
(M=37.73; SD =11.5)

Range 20 - 70 years	
27.62% - English Europe 26.67% - English Africa
0.95 % - English North
America
40.95 % - English Asia
3.81 % - English Other	
15.24% - Manual and semi-skilled workers
27.62% - Entrepreneurs and specialist professionals 13.33% - Junior executives (business administration, sales) 00.95% - Retirees & Househusbands or housewives
16.19% - Senior executives (civil service, business, intellectual or artistic professions)
10.48% - Technical and skilled workers 05.71% - Unemployed
06.67% - University students 03.81% - Service providers (B2C)

English	
Pre-test 2 (N=118)	
57.63%	
(M=35; SD =11.7)

Range 16 - 62 years	
14.41% - English Europe 21.19% - English Africa 05.93% - English North
America 55.08% - English Asia 03.39% - English Other	
12.71% - Manual and semi-skilled workers
19.49% - Entrepreneurs and specialist professionals 10.17% - Junior executives (business administration, sales) 05.08% - Retirees & Househusbands or housewives
22.03% - Senior executives (civil service, business, intellectual or artistic professions)
05.08% - Technical and skilled workers 08.47% - Unemployed
16.10% - University student 00.85% - Service providers (B2C)
	
Pilot (N=345)	
49.86%	
(M=39.63; SD =11.34)

Range 20-64 years	
100% - English North America	
31.01% - Managers
86.99% - Non-managers
 
2.2.5	IRT scoring: Case study
To our knowledge, the Thurstonian IRT model has been previously used only once on an ipsative personality assessment (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011, 2013). To investigate the benefits of using the scoring procedures based on the Thurstonian IRT model with the maximum a posteriori estimator instead of the classical test theory based scoring, we performed a case study on the final French and English version of the Professional Profile 2© questionnaire. The objective was to compare the impact of the two ways of calculating scores (IRT versus classical) on the face validity of the questionnaire.


2.2.5.a	Participants & Methods
Thirteen participants, 8 French-speaking (5 females) and 5 English-speaking (1 female) took the Professional Profile 2© online.

They were given 3 different reports including personalised comments for each personality trait measured. One report was based on the IRT score, a second one was based on CTT scores. A third report based on a random score was added as a baseline condition in order to control for acquiescence bias (control condition). The random report was different for English speaking versus French speaking individuals, but identical for participants from the same country. It was always presented in the second position, while the position of the IRT or CTT score based report (place 1 versus 3) was counterbalanced between participants.
Task 1: For each report, participants were asked to rate on a scale from 0 (not agree at all) to 10 (completely agree) if they agreed with the comments on each dimension.

Task 2: Then, for each dimension, they were asked to choose the comments which described them best. Sometimes, IRT, CTT or Random based report converged to the same score for one dimension and therefore reports displayed the same personalised comment for one dimension. In that particular case, participants were asked to select both comments.


2.2.5.b	Analyses
Task 1: The median and mode of agreement for each dimension were computed for the IRT, classical and random report (cf. see Figure 8 and Table 6).

Task 2: For each type of report, the frequency and percentage of the preferred comments were calculated for each dimension and each participant. When the preferred comments based on IRT or classical score were identical, the answers of the participant were considered for both of them. However, when the comments were identical across IRT or CTT and the random report, the score was attribute only to the experimental condition and not to the random report.


2.2.5.c	Results
Task 1. Results show that the median score on the satisfaction scale for each comment ranges from 7 to 9 (average 8) for the report based on the CTT scoring method, from 5 to 8 (average 7) for the report based on the IRT scoring method, and from 2 to 8 (average 6) on the random report. Whilst the mode score ranges from 7 to 9 (average 8) for the report based on the CTT scoring method, from 0 to 9 (average 8) for the report based on the IRT scoring method, and from 2 to 8 (average 6.5) on the random report. We also considered the number of times participants rated a score below 5 on the 10 point scale, to determine how many times they disagreed with the report comments. Disagreement scores decreased from the random report (17.6%), then IRT report (15.9%) and then to the CTT report (9.3%).

It was the report based on the CTT scoring methods that raised the best agreement scores and the least disagreement scores (see Figure 8 and Table 6).
 
 
Figure 8. Median score (out of 10) of satisfaction score for the comments of each dimension and each type of report. Report based on CTT score (solid red line, CTT); report based on IRT score (black dashed line, IRT), report based on random score (grey dotted line, random).


Table 6

Median and mode scores for the Professional Profile© on the agreement scale for the comments on each dimension and type of report.

	IRT			CTT			RANDOM		
median	mode	score <5	median	mode	score <5	median	mode	score <5
Altruism	8	9	1	8	8	2	7	7	2
Ambition	7	7	1	8	7	1	6	6	2
Need for action	5	8	4	8	9	2	6	3	1
Autonomy	7	7	0	7	7	2	5	2	3
Extraversion	8	8	2	8	8	0	2	0	4
Flexibility	8	9	2	7	8	1	6.5	8	4
Involvement at work	7	8	3	9	9	1	6	8	1
Improvisation	7	8	2	8	8	1	5	8	4
Focus on fact	8	8	2	8	8	2	7	8	0
Novelty seeking	7	7	3	8	7	1	5	2	2
Emotional distance	8	10	3	8	8	0	4	2	5
Rule-following	5.5	5	4	8	8	2	6.5	3	3
Persuasiveness	7	7	0	8	8	1	7	7	0
Desire to lead	7	7	2	9	9	1	8	9	1

Total			29
(15.9%)			17
(9.3%)			32
(17.6%)
	7	8		8	8		6	6.5	
Note. Score <5 corresponds to number of times participants disagree with personalised comments and gave a score
< 5 on the 10 point scale. CTT: Report based on Classical Test Theory score, IRT: Report based on IRT score, Random: report based on random score.
 
Task 2. Results show that 9 dimensions of the report, based on the CTT scoring methods, were preferred over the IRT and random report, while 4 dimensions of the report based on the IRT scoring were preferred over the other two reports (see Table 7).


Table 7

Frequency of distribution and percentage of preference for each type of report.

	Random		CTT		IRT	
	Frequency	%	Frequency	%	Frequency	%
Altruism	4	30.77	3	23.08	9	69.23
Ambition	1	07.69	10	76.92	8	61.54
Need for action	1	07.69	9	69.23	5	38.46
Autonomy	3	23.08	9	69.23	8	61.54
Extraversion	3	23.08	7	53.85	8	61.54
Flexibility	4	30.77	5	38.46	10	76.92
Involvement at work	0	00.00	11	84.62	4	30.77
Improvisation	0	00.00	10	76.92	7	53.85
Focus on fact	1	07.69	6	46.15	9	69.23
Novelty seeking	1	07.69	9	69.23	7	53.85
Emotional distance	2	15.38	7	53.85	8	61.54
Rule-following	2	15.38	9	69.23	6	46.15
Persuasiveness	4	30.77	7	53.85	5	38.46
Desire to lead	5	38.46	8	61.54	3	23.08
Note. CTT: Report based on classical score, IRT: Report based on IRT score, Random: report based on random score.


Results of this study indicate a preference for reports based on CTT scoring over IRT scoring. Moreover, participants were more satisfied by the report based on CTT scoring compared to the IRT scoring methods. Even if the median scores on the agreement scale are close for both IRT and CTT report, analyses show that IRT scoring led to a higher amount of scores below 5 compared to the CTT report, indicating that from the participants’ perspective the first method generates more inaccurate results than the second one.

Finding that CTT scoring of an ipsative test was more accurate than IRT scoring was surprising, as literature emphasised the issue of distorted results when using a CTT method for the scoring of an ipsative test. However, practitioners already highlighted with empirical evidences that forced-choice and normative questionnaire might produce comparable results, especially when a large number of dimensions are being measured (Baron, 1996; Karpatschof & Elkjaeer, 2000). Each Professional Profile 2© dimension indeed includes 2 opposing factors, which means that the questionnaire assesses 28 constructs, and therefore might fall into the category of a questionnaire measuring a sufficient number of dimensions to retrieve people’s absolute level of trait.

Other factors may explain the superiority of CTT scoring methods for the Professional Profile 2© questionnaire, such as the addition of the Audit Scale, which contains only pairs of items measuring the same traits. The 28 items composing the Audit Scale directly assess the two opposing factors of the 14 dimensions of the questionnaire, and may correct the distortion caused by the forced-choice format measuring two different dimensions. More research is needed to find a scoring methods that works empirically and is coherent from a statistical perspective. In the meantime, as suggested by empirical evidence, the CTT scoring methods will be used in the Professional Profile 2©.
 
3.	Scoring
A raw score is the total number of responses endorsed by a candidate for each trait. In the context of work-based assessment, raw scores mean little as they do not provide effective or appropriate comparisons between candidates across a specific trait. Norms enable HR practitioners, managers and recruiters to evaluate an individual’s score relative to the score of other delegates who completed the same assessment.


3.1.	The relationship between raw scores and norms
The best norm group is one that is most representative of the characteristics of the individuals taking a test. Applied assessment assumes personality traits, motivations, values, attitudes and perceptions are distributed along a normal probability or bell-shaped curve. Therefore, norm groups effectively identify individual scores across this distribution. In any given population, levels of a target attribute may be found. Therefore, for a given attribute or trait, the normal curve represents the norm or average performance of a population and the scores that are above and below the average for that population (Kaplan & Saccuzzo, 2008). For norms to be meaningful, the sample used must reflect the intended population of test takers. If a test is developed for engineers, the norm sample must consist of engineers in the population. Similarly if an assessment was developed for nurses, it is not appropriate for use in the selection of chemists. Norm groups can range in size from a few hundred to a hundred thousand. However the larger the norm group sample size the closer the approximation to a normal population distribution. Figure 9 shows the normal bell curve.



Figure 9. Normal Bell-shaped curve showing the distribution of percentages, standard deviations and standard ten (Sten)


Key to the creation of norms is the conversion of raw scores into derived scores. This process provides a system of common metrics that readily facilitate the interpretation of test scores. For the Professional Profile 2© the forms of score standardization used were: 1) Mean; 2) Median; 3) Standard deviation; 4) Standard score; 5) Standard ten (sten); and 6) Standard error of measurement. Table 8 describes the various types of derived scores used in the validation of the Professional Profile 2©.
 
Table 8

Types of derived scores used to standardize the Professional Profile 2©.

	Derived Score	Symbol	Definition and Characteristics
1.	Mean	µ	The average score of all participants who complete an assessment. The mean is calculated by dividing the sum of all scores by the number of participants. The formula for calculating the mean is:
𝑛
1
𝑥 = 𝑛 ∑ 𝑥𝑖
𝑖=1
2.	Median	~
𝓍	The median is the score that separates the highest scores from the lowest. The median can be found by arranging all scores in order from lowest to highest and selecting the score in the middle. Like the mean, median is a measure of the general tendency of a group of scores.
3.	Standard Deviation	σ	A measure of the amount of variation across scores for candidates who take an assessment. A small standard deviation indicates scores are close to the mean while a large value tells us there is much variability across individuals. 𝜎𝑋 =
 
√𝐸[(𝑋 − 𝐸[𝑋])2] Whereby E denotes the average or expected value of a variable X.
4.	Standard Score	Z	Estimates whether an individual’s score is above average, average or below average compared to peers. Scored on a scale from -4 to 4 with zero in the middle representing average. Positive scores are above average while negative scores are below average. Z scores are calculated using the formula 𝑧 = (𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 − µ/𝜎). Whereby score is the candidate’s raw score, µ is the mean of raw scores for all candidates and σ is the standard deviation of raw scores on the standardisation sample.
5.	Standard Ten	Sten	A standard score with scores ranging from 1 – 10. Here the mean is 5.5 and the standard deviation equals 2. The formula for calculating Sten scores is = (𝑋 − 𝜇) 2 + 5.5. Whereby X is the
𝜎
candidate’s raw score, µ is the mean of raw scores for all candidates, σ is the standard deviation of raw scores on the standardisation sample, multiplied by 2 + 5.5. Sten scores are rounded to the nearest whole number with values less than 1 or greater than 10 rounded up or down respectively.
6.	Standard	Error	of Measurement	SEM	SEM is related to test reliability and provides an indication of the dispersion of measurement errors associated with test scores from a group of candidates. It helps us to identify level of errors when estimating candidate’s true scores from their observed scores. The smaller the SEM, the more accurate are the assessments that are being made. 𝑆𝐸𝑀 = 𝜎 × √(1 − 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦).
 
3.2.	Transforming raw scores to standardised scores
For the 112 items on the Professional Profile 2© the minimum and maximum overall score for each trait are
-8 and 8. The conversion of raw scores to standardised scores is achieved using a four-step process.


Step 1	Ipsative scores are calculated for each scale by summing all forced-choice responses for each trait. For each response, 1 is assigned to the response that is endorsed and 0 for the response that is not endorsed.
Step 2	Scores are repositioned on a scale from 0 to 10 by using the following formula:


raw score − (min)
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = ( (max) − (min) ) ∗ 10

Whereby max refers to the maximum possible score of each scale and min refers to the minimum possible score of each scale.
Step 3	To enable the comparisons between individuals, scores for each scale are standardized using the mean and standard deviation across respondents. This process produces a z score using the formula:

𝑧 = (𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 − (µ/𝜎)

Step 4	
Standardised scores are then transformed into sten scores from 1 to 10 using the formula:
𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑛 = 𝑧 ∗ 2 + 5.5





The importance of standardized scores can be illustrated with the following example:

For 9 out of 10 times, a test-taker chooses items describing Extraversion over items describing other dimensions (i.e. in 90 % of all cases). However on 6 out of 10 times, the test-taker chooses items corresponding to the dimension of Rule-Following. If the test-taker is compared to a group with a high mean for Extraversion, the 90 % may not be extraordinary. However, if the comparison group is characterised by a very low mean score on Rule-Following, the 60 % is meaningful. Thus a score has to be regarded in relation to the population in order for it to be interpreted appropriately.


3.3.	Standard error of measurement
No test score is perfect. Therefore we need an estimate of the possible amount of error present within a score. The amount of error associated with a score is known as the standard error of measurement (SEM). SEM helps us to understand what is a candidate’s true score and the extent to which it differs from the obtained score (Harvill, 1991). In an ideal world, the SEM would be calculated by having an individual take an assessment on many occasions over a long period of time. The extent to which there was variation across each score obtained by the candidate would be classified as the standard error of measurement.
 
However, as it is not feasible to assess candidates multiple times, the SEM must be calculated using a different approach.

The SEM is an estimate that is added to or subtracted from a candidate’s score in order to establish a level of confidence about a score. From this confidence band, we are able to determine the extent to which a score may vary. Standard error of measurement is related to reliability. Therefore as reliability increases, SEM decreases. For a series of scores, approximately 68% of the time, an observed score will lie within +1.0 and -1.0 SEM of the true score. On 95% of occasions, the observed score will be between +1.96 and -1.96 SEM of the true score. Whilst 99% of the time, the observed score will lie within +2.58 and -2.58 SEM of the true score. The 95% confidence band of a score is calculated using the formula:

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝐵𝑎𝑛𝑑 = 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 ± 1.96 × 𝑆𝐸𝑀

Therefore for the Professional Profile 2©, a dimension with a score of 5 and SEM of 0.2, has a confidence band of 4.608 - 5.392. This means we can be 95% confident that an individual’s true score lies between this range.


3.4.	Choosing an appropriate norm group
Norms give meaning to an individual’s score. The interpretation of the same score may therefore differ depending on whether a score was obtained by a graduate, administrator or senior manager. For accurate interpretation, it is necessary to compare an individual’s score with a group that is most similar to him/her. To choose the appropriate norm, first identify the country of the candidate. Then from that country identify the age, gender, educational level, number of years work experience, social professional status, industry or occupational group most appropriate for the candidate.

Alternatively it is possible to create your own internal norms, based on the candidates that have already been assessed.


3.5.	Creating in-house norms
It is possible to generate internal organisational norms if there is a sample of 50 or more individuals who have worked in the specified role, department or sector. In-house norms ensure that comparisons between individuals and the reference group reflect the target role, tasks and work environment as closely as possible. In-house norms are particularly valuable in situations where standard norms are not available, roles are new, the organisation has a unique client-base or business function and in cases where the applicant pool for a role is significantly higher or lower than expected.

To create in-house norms, first calculate the mean and standard deviation for each dimension on the Professional Profile 2 © and score the results based on the step by step guide outlined in section 3.2. Organisations will then be able to compare individual applicants or employees to a local normal group.


3.6.	Link between scores and Report comments
Personalised comments on Professional Profile 2© reports reflect the scoring process. For each dimension, an individual receives a score of 0 to 10 (as demonstrated in Step 2). Comments provide an extensive interpretation of all dimensions of the assessments and are chosen from six levels according to the score of the candidate. They describe individual preferences and orientation toward traits with higher scores accompanied by stronger descriptors. For example, a candidate with a mean score on a trait may be classified as ‘somewhat’ in relation to behaviours associated with the trait, whilst someone with a high score is described as having a ‘strong preference for’ that trait. Candidates with low scores on dominant traits are described in positive terms in relation to the opposing trait in order to avoid the use of negative terminology in reports.
 
3.7.	Scoring the Profile Fit Percentages
The report presents profile fit percentages computed for an individual’s General Profile (e.g. reflective, cooperative, conscientious, dynamic, devoted), orientation towards desired organisational potentials (e.g. decision-making, conflict resolution, team building, stress management, result orientation) and potential fit with 58 professional careers (e.g. legal, tourism, administrative, business-oriented). Percentages reflect the degree of correspondence between a candidate’s scores on relevant dimensions and the scores of the target profile. A perfect match corresponds to a score of 100%. These sections are additional components that can be added to standard Professional Profile 2© reports.

The percentages should be interpreted in relative terms. This means that the order of the targeted profiles is more important than their absolute score. We consider that beyond a threshold for a specific dimension, such as extraversion, a score equal to or greater than this threshold corresponds to an optimal level of approximation for the Profile Fit (for example, a score of 7, 8, 9 or 10 on extraversion will be equivalent and considered as optimal for a threshold set at 7). The logic remains the same for opposing dimensions. A score equal to or lower than the threshold corresponds to an optimal level of approximation (e.g. a score of 0, 1, 2 or 3 to a threshold of 3).

This method of calculation thus takes into account only the dimensions for which the score for a participant does not match the defined threshold. Calculations are also weighted according to the strength of their threshold. A threshold set at 9 or 10 for example will have more weight than a threshold of 6 or 7.

1.	Introduction

•	What are spatial abilities?
Spatial abilities refer to processes that allow individuals to identify, recognize and differentiate objects by their shape, size or orientation. It is thanks to them that individuals are able to differentiate a soccer ball from a golf ball, a cup from a bowl, or to realize that an image is upside down.
Spatial abilities intervene both in direct perception (when objects are present) and in mental imagery (when individuals create a mental representation of an object that is not physically present) (Mellet, Petit, Mazoyer, Denis, Tzourio, 1999). Through mental imagery, individuals are able to visualize the concepts of space, volume, distance, rotation and reflection. They are able to combine conceptual measures thanks to their projective skills (Bishop, 1978).
•	Skills related to spatial abilities
Individuals with high spatial abilities tend to generate abstract and schematic mental images (Kozhevnikov, Kosslyn, & Shephard, 2005). They proceed analytically, piece by piece, which allows them to visualize the different parts of the structure of an object explicitly. Their mental images are therefore more flexible and transformable (Kozehvnikov, Hegarty & Mayer, 2002).
Thus, people with high spatial skills are more comfortable than others to read diagrams (Höffler, 2010), or to understand and interpret a graph (Kozhevnikov, Motes and Hegarty, 2007). Spatial skills have also been shown to be positively correlated with mathematical problem solving performance (Van Garderen, 2006): spatial thinking appears to be an aid in isolating the important component of a problem (Bodner and Macmillen 1986). This effect is amplified by the judicious use of schemata during reflection (Hegarty and Kozhevnikov, 1999), while individuals with low spatial skills are more likely to draw incorrect diagrams (Pribyl and Bodner 1987). In addition, spatial skills facilitate the use of data analysis and design software (Hamlon Boersma and Sorby 2006; Norman 1994), as well as understanding molecular geometry for chemistry students (Carter, Larussa and Bodner, 1987). They can also be used in a more abstract way, such as creating and manipulating models to test scientific hypotheses, or when a theory originally presented as a text or an equation is transformed into a graph or schema (Trickett & Trafton, 2007).
These skills are very important for the success and completion for STEM (science, technology, engineering, mathematics) studies and careers. Longitudinal studies have shown that spatial skills in adolescence can predict success in STEM domains (Shea, Lubinski and Benbow, 2001, Wai, Lubinski and Benbow, 2009, Webb, Lubinski and Benbow, 2007). Indeed, Wai et al. (2009), showed that participants with the highest STEM diplomas had the highest spatial abilities 11 years earlier.
•	The importance of using a specialized test
Spatial abilities are often neglected in the educational system, entrance examinations, or the selection of candidates. At present, individuals are primarily assessed based on verbal and numerical skills. As a result, individuals with excellent spatial abilities, but lower verbal or numerical abilities are not detected by current measures (Webb, et al., 2007). Humphreys, Lubinski and Yao (1993) report that thereby, engineering and physical sciences are missing many talents each year during the admissions.
It is for these reasons that Central Testing has created REASONING-SPATIAL, providing additional information needed to assess potential candidates.
1.1.	Characteristics

Questionnaire : 8 multiple choice questions
Time : 16 minutes maximum (It can be completed faster)
Time per question: 2 minutes maximum
Administration : online
 
2.	Psychometric Analysis

2.1.	Sample Descriptive

The data presented is from a French speaking sample of 228 participants (138 male, 90 female), age range of 17 to 64 (M=35.85, SD=10.86). The data collection took place between January and June 2017. To ensure the data quality, participants who completed the questionnaire in less than 6 minutes, were excluded from the analysis.


Gender
	N
Male	138 (60.5%)
Female	90 (39.4%)


STEM category
	N
STEM1	72 (31.6%)
Non-STEM	156 (68.4%)
STEM male	53 (23.2%)
Non-STEM male	85 (37.3%)
STEM female	19 (8.3%)
Non-STEM female	71 (3.1%)


Study Level
Study level		N
Student		17 (7.5%)
Level 1	Master‟s, PhD	97 (42.5%)
Level 2	Bachelor‟s Degree	40 (17.5%)
Level 3	Two Years Vocational Study	32 (14.0%)
Level 4	High School Diploma	22 (9.6%)
Level 5
Trades no training	20 (8.8%)
 





1 STEM : science, technology, engineering, mathematics
 
2.2.	Descriptive Statistics

The first item being a training item to get familiar with the task, only 7 out 8 items are being taken into account to calculate the score.

The following analysis was done by dividing the sample into STEM vs. Non-STEM and male vs female. The groups were randomly matched to obtain comparable sample sizes.

	
Mean (out of 10)	
Median	Standard deviation	
Standard error
STEM (n=72)	4.82*	4.28	3.11	0.36
Non STEM (n=72)	3.91*	4.28	2.07	0.24
Male (n=90)	4.58***	4.28	2.57	0.27
Female (n=90)	3.36***	2.86	2.24	0.24

* : The t-test shows a significant (.05) difference between STEM and non-STEM participants.
*** : The t-test shows a significant (.001) difference between male and female participants.
In line with our hypothesis, STEM show a better performances than non-STEMs. Furthermore, a gender effect was observed with men performing better than women. This is also reflected in the literature (Blajenkova, Kozhevnikov and Motes, 2006, Harris, Hirsh-Pasek and Newcombe, 2013). Nevertheless, as Sorby (2009) points out, spatial skills are very malleable and sensitive to training, so regular practice can dispel these differences.

•	The indicated central tendency measures (mean and median) are the mathematical mean of all observed scores. They give us an estimate of the difficulty and adaptation of the instrument to the population. Mathematically, they indicate at which level of the scale most scores are found.
•	The standard deviation of the scale is the mathematical mean of all the standard deviations of individuals. It is an indicator of dispersion of scores against the mean. A high standard deviation is an indicator of high dispersion, while a low standard deviation is an indicator of low dispersion.
•	The standard error of the mean gives us an estimate of the error variance that is likely to be found in the population. The lower the error compared to the mean, the more accurate the test is to evaluate this characteristic.



2.3.	Reliability

Reliability measures the extent to which an assessment is free from error and the degree to which items on a scale measure the same construct.
A primary concern, when developing and using assessments, is the extent to which random measurement errors influence test performance. If a test is unreliable, it is impossible for it to be valid, as accuracy of results (validity) depends on the consistency (reliability) with which the same results are produced. Reliability enables test users to be confident that the results accurately reflect the test taker’s attitude, aptitude or behavior in the workplace.
Internal reliability measures the extent to which items on a scale are internally consistent and all measure the same construct. Internal reliability is measured by calculating Cronbach’s Alpha (α) for each factor,
 
which computes the average of all possible inter-item correlations without relying on a single indicator of reliability, which may contain large amounts of error.


Factor	Cronbach’s alpha
STEM (n=72)	0.74
Non-STEM (n=72)	0.30
Overall	0.57

The results indicate a difference in reliability between the STEM and non-STEM groups. The most probable interpretation is that SPATIAL-REASONING is a specific tool that is well suited for evaluating a STEM population but is less suitable for evaluating a non-STEM population.


2.4.	Validity

Validity is the extent to which an assessment measures that which it is supposed to measure. This is a subjective judgment made on the basis of experience and empirical indicators. The validity of this assessment was assessed using two methods:


•	Construct Validity: If an assessment has construct validity, it implies that it measures the domain that it seeks to measure. In order to establish construct validity, this domain needs to be carefully defined, then items that are relevant to that domain must be carefully chosen and incorporated, and finally their relevance must be evaluated.
The items on this assessment were chosen by a team of psychologists, senior corporate executives, university academicians, statisticians, and other relevant personnel after numerous consultations. These items are continuously re-evaluated and updated in relation to relevant statistical data.
•	Consequential Validity : DIF – Differential Item Functioning
An item functions differently, or displays differential item functioning (DIF), if respondents from different groups have different probabilities of endorsing the item, despite having the same level of the trait. The data analysis showed no DIF for gender nor study level.

1.	Introduction
Emotional intelligence can be defined as the ability to understand one's own, as well as other people's emotions, and to manage them in an appropriate way. Emotional intelligence is essential for personal fulfilment and professional success. High levels of emotional intelligence are beneficial to an individual's personal and professional life and are fundamental for serving as a contributing member of an organisation.

EMOTION is a tool designed to assess a person's level of emotional intelligence. This includes the ability to perceive, understand, and manage one’s own emotions, as well as those of others. The corporate version of the assessment is designed to effectively meet the demands of recruitment.
The origins of emotional intelligence can be traced back to 1990, with the work of American researchers Peter Salovey and John Mayer. They gathered the expressions of many behavioural and cognitive abilities that are strongly intertwined, such as:
•	The ability to recognise one’s emotions and to understand them
•	The ability to manage one’s emotions, especially those that have a depressive or
disruptive effect
•	The ability to use one’s emotions to serve a goal
•	The ability to identify the emotions of others and to share one's own emotions
•	The ability to manage other people's emotions

General intelligence is important for problem solving; however, it is most beneficial to a person's professional and personal life when coupled with emotional intelligence. A certain level of emotional intelligence is crucial during instances when people must work together towards a shared goal, particularly in the corporate world. Furthermore, emotional intelligence is necessary for a person's efficacious adaptation to new situations.
Salovey and Mayer (1990) described emotional intelligence as “a form of social intelligence that involves the ability to monitor one’s own and others' feelings and emotions, to discriminate among them, and to use this information to guide one’s thinking and action". People with a high emotional intelligence score react better to social changes, can perceive things accurately, can understand other people and asses their emotions, and are able to build supportive social networks. A high level of emotional intelligence also provides good judgment when it comes to selecting work that is emotionally rewarding. In this way, emotionally intelligent individuals avoid procrastination, self-doubt, and low levels of achievement, and strive to reach a balance between their personal and professional life, to be self-motivated, and to manage their goals well.
 
1.1	Main Areas of Application
Applications of EMOTION can vary, as it is suitable for individuals, teams, and organisational assessment. It can be applied to employee recruitment, selection, and development processes, as well as for team and individual development, and for culture and employee commitment audits.
After completing EMOTION a report is provided detailing the results of the assessment, which provides a normative emotional intelligence score with a graphical representation of the person’s emotional intelligence. The test-taker is also provided with a summary of his/her emotional profile and the areas that he/she can work on to develop higher emotional intelligence. The report also includes a social desirability indicator to assess the validity of the candidate’s responses.

1.2	Questionnaire Structure
EMOTION consists of 15 factors which all measure a different aspect of emotional intelligence. There is an additional factor that serves as a social desirability scale. The final version of the questionnaire is comprised of 96 questions, with each factor containing 6 items. All items are measured on a 4-point Likert scale, where respondents need to specify their level of agreement or disagreement with each item (1 = This does not describe me at all, 2 = This describes me a little, 3 = This describes me fairly well, 4 = This describes me very well). This is the most common form of scoring in normative questionnaires and covers the full range of possible responses.


1.3	Mode of Administration, Languages and Special Requirements
EMOTION is administered online and is compatible with all computer systems including Windows, MAC-OS, and Linux. The assessment can be administered remotely and without supervision. Reports are solely generated online; therefore, if the test has been administered on paper, the administrator must manually enter candidates’ responses into the Central Test client platform to generate a report.
The questionnaire is available in English. For more information on other language availability, please contact the Central Test Consulting Service at consulting@centraltest.com.
EMOTION was designed to be used by individuals from diverse backgrounds and can be adapted for those with special needs. It is possible to adjust visual screen specifications, such as increasing the font size and screen display. Test instructions are accessible throughout the duration of the assessment for those who require it. Questions can be revisited and changed as desired. For candidates who are blind or have severe visual impairments, items can be read aloud by a trained administrator.
 
The average time for completion is 15 minutes; however, EMOTION does not have a time limit and therefore candidates who need more time to answer the questions can do so freely. Please contact the test publisher for guidance on administering the questionnaire to individuals or groups with special requirements.

1.4	Social Desirability
People are sociable by nature and so are inclined to seek social acceptance. Social desirability is the tendency to present oneself in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others. An individual’s need to present themselves in a favourable light negatively impacts test results (Dodou & de Winter, 2014); therefore it is of utmost importance to control for social desirability in respondents. This is especially true for recruitment purposes, as a candidate will be highly tempted to answer in a way that will impress the recruiter.
In order to control for social desirability, a social desirability scale was constructed for EMOTION. The questions pertaining to the social desirability scale were similar to the other test items in terms of vocabulary and subject; this was done to ensure they were not easily detected. The scale is composed of 6 items, the same as in all other factors.
1.5	Test-taker Requirements and Recommendations
EMOTION was designed for members of the general population over 18 years of age that are currently working or looking for work. It is recommended that candidates receive notification of the objective of the assessment, the conditions it will be administered in, how data will be handled and stored, and how the feedback will be delivered. Potential candidates should also be asked beforehand whether they have any special needs or requirements.
1.6	Administrator Qualifications and Recommendations
In order to administer EMOTION, practitioners must complete a standardised training course and/or possess accredited testing qualifications.
The aim of the training is to ensure that the test user knows how to:
-	Administer the assessment in standardised conditions
-	Interpret scores and norms
-	Generate written and verbal feedback from the results
-	Match the results to a range of organisational needs
Prior to any administration, it is recommended that administrators take EMOTION
themselves. This will enable them to become familiar with it.
Test administration must be in accordance with the organisation’s code of practice and legal regulations on the use of psychometric assessments for employment purposes. It is recommended that international and country laws, such as data protection, discrimination, race and ethnicity relations etc., are taken into account prior to administration. This is to help ensure that the test administration is objective and fair.
Additionally, prior to use, administrators must be familiar with, and adhere to, Central Test’s conditions of use, Code of Ethics, and Quality Charter. Administrators must ensure that:
•	The appropriate test(s) has been chosen to meet the organisational needs
•	The candidate is informed about the assessment and its purpose prior to administration
•	The candidate has given consent prior to administration
 
•	Appropriate norms are used to interpret results
•	The candidate is given feedback on the results
•	The results and personal information will be deleted on request by the candidate
•	The candidate has given consent prior to personal data or results being transferred to third parties
•	Only qualified personnel administer assessments and have access to the data
•	Assessment materials and reports are stored securely
For more information about Central Test’s Code of Ethics, refer to Central Test’s Quality
Charter.
1.6.1	Testing Conditions
EMOTION should be administered in a quiet, well-lit, and ventilated environment, so as to ensure that the candidate is undistracted and has a pleasant experience, thereby increasing the probability that their responses are accurate. Candidates should be allowed sufficient time to take the assessment and should thus be informed about the length of the questionnaire prior to administration. It is best to refer to the assessment as a questionnaire and not a test to reduce candidates’ anxiety levels.
Prior to testing, administrators should ensure that all relevant candidate background information has been collected and verify that the correct candidate is taking the assessment. Candidates receive an email invitation to take the questionnaire, with an embedded link and login details. All web links and login details are unique to a candidate’s account. Expiration dates can be set in order to ensure candidates complete the questionnaire within a specific time-frame.
EMOTION does not have a time restriction; however, time is monitored to allow administrators to know whether a candidate has taken an overly long or short time to complete the questionnaire. Candidates are encouraged to answer questions quickly and spontaneously, in order to provide more accurate answers.
1.7	Technical and Security Issues
The following points serve as guidelines for securely administering EMOTION. These are useful for ensuring that EMOTION is administered in an objective and fair manner. Security specifications are also important for protecting the candidate’s information, both during administration and after the completion of the assessment.
1.7.1	Respecting the Ethical Charter
As a publisher of online assessment tools, Central Test respects the legal conventions of French labour law and the regulatory provisions resulting from the law of 6 January 1978 pertaining to information technology, files and freedoms: Declaration N°1834067.
Test results and personal data cannot be shared with third parties without explicit consent from the candidate. Candidates have the right to access their results and the assessor must grant them access when requested. Furthermore, if the candidate requests it, all data must be permanently deleted; to do so the candidate must contact either the organisation or Central Test directly.
1.7.2	Confidentiality and Security
Central Test guarantees the security and confidentiality of data generated during the administration of online tests: access codes are encrypted in the database and cannot be accessed by anyone. Passwords are computationally generated and not visible to companies. A URL rewriting module (secure link generator) has been installed and has transparent parameter passing for the user.
Browsing and data exchanged via the Central Test application can be secured and represented by an icon in the form of a padlock in the internet browser. The Central Test
 
application has a <<GeoTrust SSL TRUE BusinessID>> digital signature, issued and certified by GeoTrust®. This certificate protects all Central Test assessments from phishing attacks, and serves as proof of our dedication to providing a secure platform.
Invitations to take tests are made via secured links that are of limited use (in terms of numbers and duration). The tests are timed and IP addresses are tracked.
1.7.3	Hardware Architecture and Server Availability
Central Test has a network of ten servers to provide high-quality service. Each server is housed in a specialised data centre featuring:
•	Dedicated lines
•	A guaranteed bandwidth of 100Mbps (per server)
•	Redundant energy sources
•	4-hour Equipment Restoration time
•	2-hour Incident Intervention time
•	Monitoring and assistance 24/7/365
Access to the server administration is restricted to an IP address and is password-secured. Data exchanges are secure. Central Test’s application has been tested on and is compatible with the following browsers: Internet Explorer 8 or newer, Firefox 21 or newer, Google Chrome 30 or newer, and Safari 7 or newer.
1.8	Supply, Conditions, and Availability
Conditions of supply and availability vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply: training is compulsory prior to use and distribution; EMOTION can be ordered online or by contacting any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide. The same applies for information about prices and related products and services.
 
2.	Conceptual and Practical Scale Development

2.1.	The history and value of emotional intelligence testing
The theoretical roots of Emotional Intelligence (EI) date back to the early 20th century, when it was referred to as ‘social intelligence’ and described as the “ability to understand and manage others” (Thorndike, 1920); although the term owes its widespread popularity to Goleman (2000).
As with general intelligence, there is no consensus on the exact definition of EI; however the main theories share the common concept that emotional intelligence is the ability to recognise and regulate one’s own and others’ emotions (Cherniss & Goleman, 2001). One major distinction between the existing theories of EI is in fact the conceptualisation of the term itself. Ability models stay loyal to this narrow definition, and consider EI as having a specific set of constructs that are necessary to effectively recognise and control emotions; aptitudes that are supposed to overlap with other cognitive abilities (Mayer, Caruso & Salovey, 2000). Trait models, on the other hand, use EI more broadly, as an umbrella term that includes constructs barely or not at all related to cognitive intelligence (Joseph & Newman, 2010); as a composition of intellectual abilities, personality traits and affects (Petrides & Furnham, 2001).
There is a growing amount of research pointing at the importance of emotional intelligence in various aspects of life. Nearly three time as many academic papers on this topic have been published between 2007 and 2012 than between 1995 and 2000 (Schutte, Malouff & Thorsteinsson, 2013). There are numerous studies suggesting that EI is important for success at work. A meta-analysis by Schlaerth, Ensari and Christian (2013) based on 20 studies that involved 5175 participants found a positive association between EI and constructive conflict management. Another meta-analysis based on a sample size of 5795 found EI to be a good predictor of job performance (O'Boyle et al., 2011). EI has also been shown to be associated with physical and mental health. A meta-analysis by Martins, Ramalho and Morin (2010) which examined data from 19815 participants indicated that EI is a stable and sufficient predictor of mental and physical health. Similarly, Schutte, Malouff, Thorsteinsson, Bhullar and Rooke’s (2007) meta-analysis based on 7898 participants found EI to be significantly positively correlated with health. Other studies found EI to be an important factor for sports and relationships. Cricket teams’ performance was found to be positively associated with teams’ EI scores (Crombie, Lombard & Noakes, 2009). Malouff, Schutte and Thorsteinsson’s (2014) meta-analysis found a significant association between EI and romantic relationship satisfaction.
One of the first theories of EI was an ability model by Salovey and Mayer (1990). Salovey and Mayer (1990) identified EI as the “ability to monitor one’s own and other’s feelings and emotions, to discriminate among them, and to use this information to guide one’s thinking and action” (p. 189). The authors drew their ideas from a wealth of findings across different scientific domains (e.g. evolutionary biology, computer science, and psychology), which involved the identification and understanding of emotions to create their Four Branch Model of EI. The four underlying dimensions that Mayer and Salovey (1997) conceptualised are the following: Perceiving emotions is the ability to accurately read other’s emotions (sadness, anger, joy, etc.) from their facial expressions, voice or body language, a crucial base of social communication, and more sophisticated emotional processing. The use of emotions to facilitate thought is the ability to harness the power of emotions to aid cognition. Examples of affection guided cognition can be creativity, or the manifestation of unconsciously processed information in the form of “gut feelings”. Understanding emotions is a skill that builds on the perception of emotions and connecting them with their behavioural manifestation. It is the analysis and understanding of the
 
emotional motives of people’s actions. Managing emotions is the ability to regulate one’s own and others emotions in order to help achieve certain social or personal goals. There are various instruments to measure EI in the framework of the Four Branch Model, the most recent being the Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test, or MSCEIT (Mayer, Salovey & Caruso, 2002).
Mayer and Salovey (1997) considered emotional intelligence as an ability, a part of social intelligence. Their model does not doubt the importance of traits in social interactions, but dissociates from them in order to maintain the clarity and cohesiveness of the model. Other theories, such as the Bar-On Emotional-Social Intelligence (ESI) model (Bar–On & Handley, 2003) and the Goleman model (Goleman 1998), widened the scope of investigation to include components not closely related to cognitive abilities.
The ESI model conceptualises EI more openly than Mayer and Salovey (1997), as “an array of non-cognitive capabilities, competencies, and skills that influence one’s ability to succeed in coping with environmental pressures and demands” (Bar–On, 1997, p. 14). Their model includes 15 interrelated social and emotional competencies, skills and facilitators categorised into 5 domains: 1) Interpersonal skills, the ability to be aware of and be able to express oneself includes Self-regard, Emotional Self-awareness, Assertiveness, Independence, and Self-actualisation; 2) Intrapersonal skills, to be socially aware and successfully manage interpersonal relationships includes Empathy, Social Responsibility, and Interpersonal Relationship; 3) Stress management, the regulation and management of emotions includes Stress Tolerance, and Impulse Control; 4)Adaptability, the management of change includes Reality-Testing, Flexibility, and Problem-Solving; and finally, 5) General mood, concerned with self-motivation includes Optimism, and Happiness. The ESI is measured by the Emotional Quotient Inventory (Bar-On, 1997).
Central Test’s EMOTION adopts a trait approach similar to the ESI. One of the reasons for this choice is the importance of the EI test to be practical and informative in business environments. For example, the traits selected for EMOTION are all applicable to the workplace and will allow employers to gain a greater understanding of their employees’ emotional intelligence, how they will work, and how they will interact with others. Furthermore, Martins et al’s (2010) meta-analysis found that when EI was measured as a trait it was more strongly correlated with health than when it was measured as an ability. Central Test’s EMOTION measures 15 competencies that provide a more nuanced picture of EI, and is more specific than the Salovey and Mayer’s (1990) model.
2.2	Theoretical Application
Each factor depicted in EMOTION has research to support its importance in everyday life, and therefore enforces the applicability of EMOTION. For example, assertiveness training, developed by behavioural therapists, has been an important tool in behavioural therapy (Bandura, 1969; Mischel, 1968; Ullmann & Krasner, 1965). Mehrabizade, Taghavi and Attari (2009) and Keikhayfarzaneh (2011) found that assertiveness training improved school performance, social skills and decreased social anxiety in high school students. Lin et al. (2004) found that assertiveness training improved medical students’ self-esteem and assertiveness. These findings suggest that assertiveness is a construct that is correlated with a person’s well-being, performance, social skills and therefore is included in Central Test’s EMOTION assessment.
Another example comes from recent research which suggests that expressing emotions can promote the well-being of people who are under stress (Stanton & Low, 2012).
Brans et al. (2014) found that sharing emotions, like anger or sadness, may lead to beneficial effects. A meta-analysis conducted by Frattaroli (2006) demonstrated an overall positive effect of disclosing emotions and feelings. Sharing emotions is believed
 
to be beneficial in a way that it might result in a catharsis that helps dissolve negative feelings (Scheff, 2007; Littrell, 2008), and expression appears to be a component of almost every therapeutic method (Whelton, 2004). Although empirical evidence is far from conclusive (Brans et al., 2014), and the relationship between expression and negative feelings appears to be very complex (Kennedy-Moore & Watson, 2001; Stanton & Low, 2012), the possible beneficial effect of expressing emotions makes it reasonable to include this domain.
Scott, Colquitt, Paddock, and Judge (2010) found that managers’ empathy had a positive effect on employee well-being, and Kellett, Humphrey, and Sleeth (2002, 2006) found empathy to be the most prevalent predictor of leadership emergence. A study by Sadri, Weber and Gentry (2011) of 37,095 people from 38 countries found that leaders’ empathic acts rated by their subordinates correlated with their performances rated by their supervisors. Scientific evidence therefore clearly shows that empathy is an important domain to measure.
Being able to solve conflicts effectively between parties is a valuable skill to possess for both employer and employee, and has a number of benefits such as the satisfaction of disputants (Bush, 1996; Depner, Cannata & Ricci, 1994), their improved relationship (Johnson & Johnson, 1996; Johnson, Johnson, Dudley, Ward & Magnuson, 1995; Joseph, 1996), or improved problem solving (Fisher, 1997; Smith, 1996). Beyond being beneficial for disputants, mediating has certain benefits for the mediator too, such as reputation (Touval, 1996), or improved social skills (Day-Vines et al., 1996; Shulman 1996). Conflicts at the workplace are inevitable; to be able to mediate between conflicting parties is not only more cost effective than other ways of solving disputes, but also seems to have a positive effect on all parties involved. It is therefore a very useful skill to possess for everybody and a particularly important one for leaders.
In a world where migration has become more prevalent than ever due to globalisation, the demographic of countries has been changing and diversity in the workplace is becoming the norm. Some research suggests that diversity at work results in positive outcomes such as innovation (e.g. Richard, Barnett, Dwyer & Chadwick, 2004), while others suggest that diversity may have negative outcomes such as staff turnover or lowered profitability (Sacco & Schmitt, 2005); although the general consensus appears to be that diversity has the potential for both (Gonzalez & Denisi, 2009). The increasing diversity in the workplace, and the possible benefits and dangers of diversity, makes this construct important to be measured in a comprehensive and practical EI test.
Another important area of emotional intelligence is self-confidence, which is of importance in every aspect of life. People’s self-confidence affects their choice of tasks (Bandura, 1969). Dutton (1995) speculated that failure may hurt people with low more than people with high self-esteem. Dutton and Brown (1997) indeed showed that failure on tasks can result in low self-esteem.
Being optimistic has numerous mental and physical health benefits. A meta-analysis by Rasmussen, Scheier and Greenhouse (2009) of 83 studies found optimism to be a predictor of various physical health outcomes such as less pain, better immune functions, and more positive pregnancy outcomes. Optimism was also found to predict better job performance (Luthans, Lebsack & Lebsack, 2008).


2.3	Factor Descriptions
EMOTION consists of 15 factors and a social desirability scale. Each factor captures a different aspect of emotional intelligence. The definitions of the factors can be found below:
 
Assertiveness refers to the ability to be confident in articulating one's opinion and standing up for what one believes in, even to the extent of causing an argument. People with high scores are able to portray how they are feeling in a manner suitable to the situation they are in. When the situation calls for confrontation, they do not turn away and are able to express their opinions and feelings effectively. People with low scores tend to avoid confrontation and do not generally express their point of view, as they may worry that others may not agree with them or that their opinion could damage relationships.
Dealing with Diversity is the ability to recognise, acknowledge, and accept differences in others. People with high scores respect and welcome people from diverse backgrounds. They readily accept the wide range of variety and make the best use of it. People with low scores tend to find it difficult to come to terms with the diversity around them. They may even find it as a hindrance for progress.
Empathy is the capacity to identify, understand, and relate to the emotions, reactions, and priorities of others. People with high scores are able to make sense of what others are feeling, even if it is not expressed explicitly. They are skilled at detecting emotional cues from people they interact with and reciprocate in a suitable manner. People with low scores tend to find it difficult to interpret and appropriately respond to someone else’s feelings and reactions, especially if they are non-verbal.
Expressing Emotions refers to the ability to be comfortable when clearly conveying how one feels, both verbally and non-verbally. People with high scores are able to clearly convey their emotions to others, which allows them to talk through their feelings and gain support and feedback. People with low scores may find it difficult to clearly convey how they are feeling, which can mean that they tend to internalise their emotions and may not receive support required.
Flexibility refers to the ability to adapt one's thinking process and emotions in order to accommodate new standards and situations. People with high scores tend to be able to easily adapt their emotions and thought process in order to accommodate new situations. They are able to let go of habits and routine thoughts in order to adapt to their new surroundings. People with low scores may find it hard to adapt their thought process and feelings to a new situation. They tend to prefer to remain in familiar surroundings with emotions and thoughts they are accustomed to.
Mediation refers to the ability to mediate and reconcile diverging points of view in situations of disagreement or conflict. People with high scores do not shy away from situations involving conflicts. They try their best to bring about a win-win situation for both parties. People with low scores are not likely to be inclined towards solving conflicts. They might try to move themselves away from frictions and disputes.
Motivating others is the ability to encourage, inspire, and stimulate others into achieving goal-orientated behaviour. People with high scores have the ability to encourage and inspire others to reach their goals. They are able to generate positive emotions and consider other people’s motivations and feelings. People with low scores may find it difficult when encouraging and inspiring others to reach their goals.
Optimism refers to the capacity to face situations and problems with a positive attitude and thought process, while seizing opportunities and seeing the best in everything. People with high scores tend to have a positive thinking style and outlook on life. They are able to seize opportunities by believing that the best is yet to come and that failure is a learning experience. People with low scores can get overwhelmed by certain situations, and may focus too much on failure instead of utilising it as a learning experience.
 
Resilience is the capacity to quickly recover from adverse and stressful situations. People with high scores have the ability to withstand and bounce back from stressful or disappointing situations, which enables them to have the capacity to overcome adversity. People with low scores tend to find it difficult to recover quickly following a stressful or disappointing situation. They may allow their emotions from this situation to affect them and cloud their judgement.
Self-confidence is having a strong belief in oneself and one's abilities. People with high scores tend to have a strong sense of assurance when it comes to themselves and what they are capable of achieving. They do not doubt themselves and put trust in their own judgement and ability. People with low scores tend to doubt themselves and their abilities. They find it difficult to fully believe in their capabilities and are hesitant when faced with new tasks believing that they do not have the skills or knowledge to succeed, even if they do.
Self-control is the ability to restrain impulses and regulate reactions, while thinking clearly and maintaining adaptive behaviour. People with high scores are able to remain composed and think clearly, by restraining their negative impulses, when faced with difficult situations. They are able to adapt to situations and individuals, and can regulate their reactions to suit their circumstances. People with low scores can appear emotional when faced with difficult situations, as they tend to act upon their impulses and reactions. They may find it difficult to think clearly under pressure and adapt to new or challenging circumstances.
Self-knowledge is the awareness and understanding of oneself and one's emotions, needs, and desires. People with high scores are able to understand themselves and identify how they are feeling, and consequently have a good awareness of why they may feel, think or act in a certain way. People with low scores find it difficult to comprehend why they are acting or feeling a certain way, as they may not yet have a concrete awareness of themselves.
Self-motivation is the ability to guide and direct ones' needs and desires, in order to keep moving towards ones' goals with enthusiasm and a positive attitude. People with high scores are able to direct themselves to ensure that they keep progressing forward with their goals. They tend to guide their positive attitude and enthusiasm to facilitate this process. People with low scores may find it difficult to direct themselves towards their goals, as they may lack enthusiasm and drive to reach these goals.
Self-regard is the realistic appraisal of one's worth, including strengths and limitations. People with high scores have high self-worth and value themselves. They focus on their strengths while recognising their limitations, and are not dependent on what others think of them. People with low scores tend to focus on their shortcomings more than their achievements and strengths. They tend to undervalue themselves and their own worth.
Tactfulness is the ability to put forward one's opinion and views in a subtle and delicate manner, while being considerate about other peoples' feelings, opinions, or position. People with high scores are able to subtly portray their opinions to others when facing tensions, taking into consideration the other peoples' emotions and feelings. People with low scores tend to find it difficult to be subtle when communicating with others in a tension situation. They may lack consideration for other people's feelings by not portraying their opinion in a sensitive manner.
 
3.	Sample Descriptives
The data presented is from a UK sample of 270 professionals (117 male, 153 female), age range of 18 to 65 (M=43.31, SD=12.60). The sample represents a range of job sectors including finance, medicine, and technology, and a variety of study levels ranging from trades training to PhD.
Table 1 Gender

Gender	%	N
Male	43.33%	117
Female	56.67%	153

Table 2 Age

Age (years)	Percentage (%)	N
18 – 25	8.52%	23
26 – 33	18.15%	49
34 – 41	16.30%	44
42 - 49	21.11%	57
50 – 56	17.78%	48
57+	18.15%	49

Table 3 Study Level

Study Level	Percentage (%)	N
Level 5: Trades no training	8.89%	24
Level 4: High School Diploma	27.41%	74
Level 3: Two Years Vocational Study	22.22%	60
Level 2: Bachelor’s Degree	31.48%	85
Level 1: Master’s, PhD	10.00%	27

Table 4 Socio-professional category

Socio-demographic	Percentage (%)	N
Business Owners	8.89%	24
Employees (unskilled, civil service, business)	17.78%	48
Independent Professionals	10.00%	27
Junior Executives (business, administration, sales)	15.93%	43
Junior Executives (education, health, civil service)	8.15%	22
Manual Labourers	7.04%	19
Merchants or Vendors	0.74%	2
Other people without employment	0.37%	1
Retirees , Househusbands or housewives	1.48%	4
 
Seeking work	1.48%	4
Senior Executives (civil service, business, intellectual or artistic professionals)	7.04%	19
Service Providers (B2C)	2.96%	8
Skilled Tradespeople	8.15%	22
Students (high school/ secondary school)	0.74%	2
Students (university)	1.11%	3
Technicians, foremen, supervisors	8.15%	22
 
4.	Norms
Norms help in the comparison of an individual’s score with the scores of others who have completed the same assessment. The individuals who took the test are considered representative of the population and so are used for norming. The closer the sample population falls to the target population, the more accurate the distribution will be when used to rank individuals. Norm groups enable us to compare an individual’s score to those of a similar population.
EMOTION was administered to 270 UK working professionals. The sample was provided via the professional research and sampling firm CINT. Respondents received compensation from CINT for their participation. Respondents whose answers were deemed unreliable or those who completed the assessment in under 9 minutes (or under 6 minutes for the retest group) were excluded from the sample, resulting in a final sample of 270 respondents.
Tables 5-9 show the mean, standard deviation, minimum, and maximum scores for the UK sample on the EMOTION factors, and are organised into categories based on study level, age, socio-professional category, and gender.
Table 5 Norms by factors

Score	Mean	Median	Standard Deviation	Standard Error
of Measurement	Minimum	Maximum
AST	5.67	5.80	2.24	0.14	0.00	10.00
DWD	4.95	5.00	1.97	0.12	0.00	10.00
EMP	5.74	6.30	2.20	0.13	0.00	10.00
EEM	4.37	4.20	2.40	0.15	0.00	10.00
FLE	5.18	5.00	1.87	0.11	0.00	10.00
MED	5.91	6.70	2.32	0.14	0.00	10.00
MOO	5.96	6.70	2.33	0.14	0.00	10.00
OPT	4.28	4.20	2.42	0.15	0.00	10.00
RES	4.11	4.20	2.52	0.15	0.00	10.00
SCO	4.31	4.20	2.28	0.14	0.00	10.00
SCN	5.07	5.00	2.10	0.13	0.40	10.00
SKN	4.68	4.60	2.18	0.13	0.40	10.00
SMO	4.74	4.60	2.42	0.15	0.00	10.00
SRE	4.42	4.20	2.34	0.14	0.00	10.00
TAC	5.98	6.30	2.02	0.12	0.00	10.00
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ EMP – Empathy
◦	FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self-confidence ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SCN – Self- control ◦ TAC – Tact
 

 
Table 6 Gender by factors

Gende r	N		AST	DWD	EEM	EMP	FLE	MED	MOO	OPT	RES	SCO	SRE	SMO	SKN	SCN	TAC
		Mean	5.85	4.91	5.53	4.32	5.20	5.73	5.70	4.45	4.31	4.68	5.28	4.99	4.72	5.02	5.99
Male	11
7	Median	6.30	5.00	5.50	4.20	5.40	6.30	5.80	4.60	3.80	4.20	5.40	5.00	4.60	5.00	5.80
		SD	2.33	2.04	2.20	2.31	2.12	2.36	2.45	2.49	2.53	2.35	2.01	2.22	2.34	2.31	1.91
		SEM	0.22	0.19	0.20	0.21	0.20	0.22	0.23	0.23	0.23	0.22	0.19	0.20	0.22	0.21	0.18
		Mean	5.53	4.99	5.90	4.41	5.17	6.04	6.16	4.15	3.96	4.03	4.91	4.44	4.75	3.97	5.97
Femal e	15
3	Median	5.80	5.00	6.30	4.20	5.00	6.70	6.70	3.80	4.20	4.20	5.00	4.20	4.60	3.80	6.30
		SD	2.17	1.92	2.20	2.47	1.67	2.29	2.22	2.36	2.51	2.19	2.15	2.14	2.49	2.27	2.11
		SEM	0.18	0.15	0.18	0.20	0.14	0.19	0.18	0.19	0.20	0.18	0.17	0.17	0.20	0.18	0.17
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ EMP – Empathy ◦ FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self-confidence ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SCN – Self-control ◦ TAC – Tact
 
Table 7 Age by factors












34 - 41	44
 
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ EMP – Empathy ◦ FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self-confidence ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SCN – Self-control ◦ TAC – Tact
Table 8 Study Level by factors
 
Study Level	N	AST	DW	EM
 
EE	FLE	ME
 
MO	OP
O	T
 
RES	SC
 
SC	SK
N	N
 
SM	SRE	TAC
 
5.2
Mean	0
 
4.70	5.00	3.1
8
 
4.8
3
 
4.75	4.85	3.5
4
 
3.8
5
 
4.3
6
 
4.9
2
 
4.4
5
 
4.35	4.3
5
 
5.5
7
 


Level 5: Trades no training
 

Media
2	n
4
 
5.0
0
2.5
 
4.80	4.95	2.9
0
2.0
 
5.4
0
2.2
 
4.60	5.60	3.1
0
2.5
 
3.7
5
2.5
 
4.6
0
2.4
 
5.4
0
1.4
 
3.8
0
2.4
 
4.20	4.6
0
2.1
 
6.0
5
2.0
 
SD	1	2.05	2.25	9
 
1	2.00	2.27	8	0	6	0
 
9	2.15	6	3
 
0.5
SEM	1
5.8
Mean	1
 
0.42	0.46	0.4
3
4.86	5.83	4.5
4
 
0.4
5
5.0
9
 
0.41	0.46	0.5
3
5.90	5.64	4.0
1
 
0.5
1
3.7
0
 
0.5
0
4.1
7
 
0.2
9
4.6
1
 
0.5
1
4.5
0
 
0.44	0.4
4
4.62	4.1
4
 
0.4
2
5.9
9
 

Level 4: High School Diploma	7
4
 

Media n
 
6.3
0
2.2
 
5.00	6.30	4.4
0
2.5
 
5.0
0
1.7
 
6.70	5.80	4.2
0
2.2
 
4.0
0
2.2
 
4.2
0
2.1
 
4.8
0
2.2
 
4.4
0
2.0
 
4.20	4.2
0
2.2
 
6.7
0
1.9
 
SD	5	2.04	2.28	5
 
4	2.40	2.58	9	6	9	3
 
6	2.52	3	5
 
0.2
SEM	6
5.7
Mean	6
 
0.24	0.27	0.3
0
4.96	5.80	4.4
4
 
0.2
0
4.9
5
 
0.28	0.30	0.2
7
5.49	6.09	4.2
4
 
0.2
6
4.6
8
 
0.2
5
4.3
3
 
0.2
6
5.4
5
 
0.2
4
4.6
9
 
0.29	0.2
6
4.88	4.7
1
 
0.2
3
5.9
1
 

Level 3: 2 Years Vocational Training
 

Media
6	n
 
5.8
0
 
5.00	6.40	4.6
0
 
5.0
0
 
5.40	6.70	4.2
0
 
4.2
0
 
4.4
0
 
5.8
0
 
4.6
0
 
5.00	4.2
0
 
6.0
5
 
0	2.2
SD	2
 
2.02	2.37	2.1
7
 
1.8
8
 
2.15	1.95	2.2
7
 
2.5
8
 
2.3
1
 
2.3
8
 
1.9
8
 
2.50	2.4
6
 
2.2
7
 

 	 
 
0.2
SEM	9
5.6
Mean	1
 
0.26	0.31	0.2
8
5.18	5.86	4.5
5
 
0.2
4
5.4
3
 
0.28	0.25	0.2
9
6.24	6.29	4.6
6
 
0.3
3
4.2
5
 
0.3
0
4.5
1
 
0.3
1
5.3
8
 
0.2
6
5.0
8
 
0.32	0.3
2
4.93	4.7
4
 
0.2
9
6.1
7
 


Level 2: Bachelor's Degree
 

Media
8	n
5
 
5.8
0
2.1
 
5.00	5.80	4.2
0
2.3
 
5.0
0
2.0
 
6.70	6.70	4.2
0
2.5
 
4.2
0
2.6
 
4.2
0
2.3
 
5.4
0
2.0
 
5.0
0
2.3
 
4.60	5.0
0
2.4
 
6.3
0
1.9
 
SD	9	1.99	2.02	9
 
4	2.39	2.30	2	0	3	0
 
1	2.45	2	3
 
0.2
SEM	4
5.7
Mean	1
 
0.22	0.22	0.2
6
4.71	5.62	4.2
6
 
0.2
2
5.5
0
 
0.26	0.25	0.2
7
6.84	6.47	4.5
6
 
0.2
8
3.7
8
 
0.2
5
3.9
9
 
0.2
2
4.6
9
 
0.2
5
4.0
6
 
0.27	0.2
6
4.45	3.6
6
 
0.2
1
5.8
9
 


Level 1: Master's, PhD
 

Media
2	n
7
 
5.8
0
2.2
 
4.60	5.80	3.3
0
2.5
 
5.8
0
1.1
 
7.10	6.70	4.2
0
2.5
 
3.3
0
2.7
 
3.8
0
2.2
 
4.6
0
1.6
 
4.2
0
2.1
 
4.20	3.8
0
2.1
 
5.8
0
1.9
 
SD	7	1.56	2.14	8
 
9	2.05	2.24	1	4	3	1
 
9	2.16	5	7
 
0.4
SEM	4
 
0.30	0.41	0.5
0
 
0.2
3
 
0.39	0.43	0.4
8
 
0.5
3
 
0.4
3
 
0.3
1
 
0.4
2
 
0.42	0.4
1
 
0.3
8
 
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ EMP – Empathy ◦ FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self-confidence ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SCN – Self-control ◦ TAC – Tact
Table 9 Socio-professional Level by factors

Job	N		AST	DW D	EM P	EE M	FLE	ME D	MO O	OP T	RES	SC O	SC N	SK N	SM O	SRE	TAC
		Mean	6.3
3	5.34	6.56	5.26	5.3
0	6.55	7.10	4.3
0	4.3
7	4.6
7	5.2
3	5.05	5.27	5.2
3	6.8
8
Business Owners																	
	2
  4	Media
	n		6.7
0					5.4
0				4.2
0		4.2
0		4.8
0		5.0
0				5.2
0		6.9
0	
				4.80	6.90	5.40		6.90	7.10					4.80	4.80		
 

Job	N	AST	DW	EM D		P
 
EE	FLE	ME
M	D
 
MO	OP
O	T
 

RES	SC O
 
SC	SK
N	N
 

SM	SRE	TAC O
 
SD	2.2
 
2.12	1.57	2.34	2.0
 
2.09	1.41	2.3
 
2.8
2
 
2.6
0
 
2.3
3
 
2.08	2.50	2.8
 
1.9
0
 
 
		SEM

Mean	0.4
7
5.0
4	0.43

4.86	0.32

5.43	0.48

3.73	0.4
1
5.2
6	0.43

4.68	0.29

4.61	0.4
8
3.8
3	0.5
8
3.9
2	0.5
3
4.0
4	0.4
7
4.5
9	0.43

4.46	0.51

4.49	0.5
8
4.2
2	0.3
9
5.2
4

Employees

4
8
Media n
SD	5.0
0
2.2
5	5.00

1.75	5.40

2.16	3.10

2.39	5.6
0
1.9
0	4.20

2.17	4.80

2.24	3.8
0
2.2
6	4.0
0
2.0
5	4.2
0
1.8
6	4.4
0
1.9
3	4.20

1.86	4.20

2.58	4.2
0
1.9
6	5.8
0
2.0
0
		SEM

Mean	0.3
3
5.8
6	0.25

4.81	0.31

5.56	0.34

4.80	0.2
7
5.5
7	0.31

6.41	0.32

6.29	0.3
3
5.1
6	0.3
0
4.2
3	0.2
7
4.6
7	0.2
8
5.0
7	0.27

5.18	0.37

4.70	0.2
8
4.4
9	0.2
9
6.1
2

Independent

2	Media n	5.8
0	4.60	6.30	4.60	5.8
0	7.50	6.70	5.0
0	4.2
0	5.0
0	5.0
0	5.00	4.20	3.8
0	6.7
0
Professionals	7	SD	1.8
6	1.68	2.29	1.94	1.4
0	2.33	2.19	2.3
2	2.2
8	2.0
4	2.0
5	2.27	2.26	2.0
6	1.7
8
		SEM

Mean	0.3
6
5.9
0	0.32

5.36	0.44

5.96	0.37

4.85	0.2
7
5.2
3	0.45

6.60	0.42

6.42	0.4
5
4.2
6	0.4
4
4.1
3	0.3
9
4.3
6	0.3
9
5.4
2	0.44

4.84	0.43

4.83	0.4
0
4.2
2	0.3
4
6.3
7
Junior Executives (business	
4	Media n	6.3
0	5.40	6.30	4.60	5.4
0	7.50	6.70	4.2
0	3.8
0	4.2
0	5.8
0	5.00	4.20	4.2
0	6.7
0
administration,
sales)	3	SD	2.1
6	2.19	2.29	2.70	1.7
5	2.31	2.12	2.3
0	2.6
9	2.1
6	2.3
5	2.30	2.68	2.2
1	2.1
7
		SEM	0.3
3	0.33	0.35	0.41	0.2
7	0.35	0.32	0.3
5	0.4
1	0.3
3	0.3
6	0.35	0.41	0.3
4	0.3
3
Junior Executives (education,	
2	Mean	5.2
6	4.59	6.02	3.45	5.0
0	6.62	6.72	4.6
6	3.7
6	4.0
1	5.5
9	4.31	4.67	3.9
9	6.2
0
health, civil
	service)		2	Media n	5.0
0	5.00	6.30	2.90	5.0
0	6.70	7.30	4.8
0	3.5
5	3.8
0	5.8
0	5.00	4.20	3.8
0	6.3
0
 

Job	N	AST	DW	EM D		P
 
EE	FLE	ME
M	D
 
MO	OP
O	T
 

RES	SC O
 
SC	SK
N	N
 

SM	SRE	TAC O
 
SD	2.4
 
1.84	1.98	1.93	1.5
 
1.95	2.26	2.4
 
2.3
9
 
2.1
8
 
1.9
4
 
2.01	2.16	2.3
 
1.8
6
 
 
		SEM

Mean	0.5
2
4.7
0	0.39

5.03	0.42

4.44	0.41

3.48	0.3
2
4.5
4	0.42

5.54	0.48

6.21	0.5
3
3.0
8	0.5
1
3.9
5	0.4
7
3.4
7	0.4
1
5.1
8	0.43

3.81	0.46

4.35	0.4
9
3.6
1	0.4
0
6.0
1

Manual labourers
1
9
Media n
SD	5.0
0
2.7
7	5.00

1.68	3.80

2.31	2.90

2.52	5.0
0
2.0
9	5.00

2.50	6.70

2.99	2.9
0
2.2
8	4.2
0
2.3
9	2.9
0
2.2
8	5.4
0
1.9
9	3.80

1.92	5.00

2.66	3.3
0
2.5
3	6.3
0
1.7
6
		SEM

Mean	0.6
4
6.4
5	0.39

5.60	0.53

4.00	0.58

3.75	0.4
8
5.6
0	0.57

4.40	0.69

4.40	0.5
2
7.3
0	0.5
5
7.3
0	0.5
2
6.0
5	0.4
6
6.7
0	0.44

5.40	0.61

5.65	0.5
8
6.2
5	0.4
0
6.6
5
Merchants or

vendors	
2
Media n
SD	6.4
5
0.9
2	5.60

3.25	4.00

0.28	3.75

1.77	5.6
0
0.2
8	4.40

0.28	4.40

0.85	7.3
0
1.4
1	7.3
0
0.2
8	6.0
5
0.3
5	6.7
0
0.0
0	5.40

0.00	5.65

1.48	6.2
5
0.6
4	6.6
5
1.7
7



Other people



1
SEM
Mean Media	0.6
5
7.1
0
7.1	2.30

2.50

2.50	0.20

2.10

2.10	1.25

5.40

5.40	0.2
0
1.3
0
1.3	0.20

2.50

2.50	0.60

3.80

3.80	1.0
0
0.0
0
0.0	0.2
0
0.0
0
0.0	0.2
5
1.3
0
1.3	0.0
0
0.4
0
0.4	0.00

0.40

0.40	1.05

2.50

2.50	0.4
5
1.7
0
1.7	1.2
5
2.1
0
2.1
without	n	0				0			0	0	0	0			0	0
employment	SD	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA
	SEM	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA

Retirees, Househusbands or Housewives	
4	Mean
Media n
SD
6.4
8
6.0
5
1.7
1	4.30

4.00

2.08	6.47

6.90

1.29	5.00

5.00

2.39	6.1
7
6.5
0
1.7
2	7.73

7.70

0.87	6.88

7.50

2.60	4.1
7
4.8
0
3.0
3	2.5
0
2.5
0
2.0
4	3.4
8
4.0
0
1.4
9	4.4
0
4.6
0
2.1
6	4.15

3.95

3.28	5.55

5.65

0.88	3.2
5
3.1
5
2.5
6	5.4
0
5.2
0
2.2
7
 

Job	N	AST	DW	EM D		P
 
EE	FLE	ME
M	D
 
MO	OP
O	T
 

RES	SC O
 
SC	SK
N	N
 

SM	SRE	TAC O
 
SEM	0.8
 
1.04	0.65	1.20	0.8
 
0.44	1.30	1.5
 
1.0
2
 
0.7
4
 
1.0
8
 
1.64	0.44	1.2
 
1.1
4
 













SEM	0.6
8
Mean	6.3
7
 













0.41	0.81	0.51	0.6
1
4.67	6.43	4.87	4.8
0
 













0.67	0.67	0.8
3
5.51	5.31	4.1
0
 



















0.7
1
4.4
4
 



















0.6
4
4.9
5
 



















0.5
7
4.1
7
 













0.75	0.73	0.6
0
4.65	4.71	4.8
3
 



















0.7
7
5.8
2
 
Skilled Tradespeople
 
2	Media
2	n
 
6.9
0
 
4.80	7.10	5.60	5.0
0
 
5.20	5.80	4.2
0
 
5.0
0
 
4.8
0
 
4.2
0
 
4.40	4.80	5.0
0
 
5.8
0
 
SD	2.1
5
 
2.18	2.23	2.20	1.6
2
 
2.14	2.22	1.8
6
 
2.7
3
 
2.6
4
 
1.8
9
 
2.16	2.08	2.4
5
 
1.5
7
 
 
 

Job	N	AST	DW	EM D		P
 
EE	FLE	ME
M	D
 
MO	OP
O	T
 

RES	SC O
 
SC	SK
N	N
 

SM	SRE	TAC O
 
SEM	0.4
Mean	8.5
 
0.47	0.48	0.47	0.3
2.70	9.20	1.05	5.6
 
0.46	0.47	0.4
8.95	8.55	4.1
 
0.5
8
2.1
0
 
0.5
6
2.7
0
 
0.4
0
3.5
5
 
0.46	0.44	0.5
4.60	3.55	2.9
 
0.3
4
6.7
0
 
Students (high School/secondar	2
y
School)
 
Media	8.5
n	5
SD	0.3
SEM	0.2
5
Mean	5.5
7
 
2.70	9.20	1.05	5.6
3.25	0.00	0.92	0.9
2.30	0.00	0.65	0.6
5
4.87	6.97	3.63	5.3
0
 
8.95	8.55	4.1
1.48	2.05	1.2
1.05	1.45	0.8
5
7.90	6.97	5.5
7
 
2.1
0
0.5
7
0.4
0
3.0
3
 
2.7
0
0.8
5
0.6
0
3.9
0
 
3.5
5
2.6
2
1.8
5
5.9
7
 
4.60	3.55	2.9
4.10	2.62	0.5
2.90	1.85	0.4
0
3.77	4.73	4.4
7
 
6.7
0
0.0
0
0.0
0
6.9
3
 

Students (university)
 
Media	5.8
3	n	0
SD	1.2
7
SEM	0.7
3
Mean	4.9
 
3.80	7.10	3.80	5.0
0
3.04	0.23	0.29	1.2
8
1.76	0.13	0.17	0.7
4
4.03	5.08	3.74	4.2
 
7.90	6.70	5.0
0
0.40	0.46	1.7
2
0.23	0.27	0.9
9
4.96	5.15	4.0
 
3.3
0
0.4
6
0.2
7
4.0
2
 
4.2
0
0.5
2
0.3
0
4.0
4
 
7.1
0
2.3
2
1.3
4
5.3
1
 
3.80	4.20	4.2
0
0.45	1.76	0.4
6
0.26	1.02	0.2
7
4.91	3.72	4.5
 
7.1
0
1.0
6
0.6
1
5.3
1
 
Technicians, foremen, supervisors
 
Media	5.0
2	n	0
2	SD	1.8
SEM	0.3
 
4.20	5.45	3.75	4.0
2.22	2.18	2.25	2.2
0.47	0.46	0.48	0.4
 
4.60	5.60	4.2
2.26	2.30	2.7
0.48	0.49	0.5
 
4.0
0
2.6
0
0.5
5
 
3.5
5
2.7
4
0.5
8
 
5.2
0
2.0
3
0.4
3
 
4.60	3.80	4.0
2.23	2.15	2.5
0.47	0.46	0.5
 
6.0
5
2.5
0
0.5
3
 
 
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ EMP – Empathy ◦ FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self-confidence ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SCN – Self-control ◦ TAC – Tact
 
5.	Reliability
Reliability measures the extent to which an assessment is free from error and the degree to which items on a scale measure the same construct. For example, all of the items that measure Resilience are coherent and reflect the definition of the factor. A primary concern, when developing and using assessments, is the extent to which random measurement errors influence test performance. If a test is unreliable, it is impossible for it to be valid, as accuracy of results (validity) depends on the consistency (reliability) with which the same results are produced. Reliability enables test users to be confident that the results accurately reflect the test taker’s attitude, aptitude or behaviour in the workplace. In the context of a work-based assessment, reliability helps assure test users that the scores obtained reflect how a job candidate or employee is likely to behave in the workplace, interact with others, and work on specific tasks. If an assessment has high reliability, it also helps to guard against biases that may be caused from errors in human judgement during the recruitment and selection process.
5.1	Internal Reliability
Internal reliability measures the extent to which items on a scale are internally consistent and all measure the same construct. Internal reliability is measured by calculating Cronbach’s Alpha (α) for each factor, which computes the average of all possible inter- item correlations without relying on a single indicator of reliability, which may contain large amounts of error. Cronbach’s Alpha ranges from 0 to 1, with a minimum recommended value of .7 (1 being equal to perfect reliability (Nunnally, 1978). Values greater than .9 are considered excellent, of .7 to .9 are considered good, of .6 to .7 are acceptable, of .5 to .6 are poor, and values of less than .5 are unacceptable. In order to ensure strong internal reliability for EMOTION, items for factors that obtained a Cronbach’s Alpha (α) below .7 were altered during the pre-test stage based on whether their item-factor correlation was below .5 or if the alpha for the factor improved when deleting the item.
Table 10 Internal reliability across factors
Factors	a
Overall	0.95
Assertiveness	0.81
Dealing with Diversity	0.71
Expressing Emotions	0.80
Empathy	0.86
Flexibility	0.63
Mediation	0.82
Motivating Others	0.86
Optimism	0.81
Resilience	0.82
Self Confidence	0.76
Self-Regard	0.77
Self-Motivation	0.80
Self-Knowledge	0.73
Self-Control	0.70
Tactfulness	0.73

Cronbach’s Alpha was computed for factors of EMOTION on the standardised UK sample (n=270). Nine factors showed great internal consistency with alphas above .8 and six showed very good consistency with alphas above .7. Only one factor (Flexibility) obtained an alpha bellow .7, which is nonetheless considered acceptable .63 (see Table 10.)
 
EMOTION has a Cronbach’s Alpha of .95 for the overall scale, indicating that the scale has very strong internal consistency and is therefore highly reliable in measuring Emotional Intelligence.
5.2	Split-half Reliability
Split-half reliability is another measurement of reliability. In split-half reliability, the test is randomly divided and compared; by doing so it determines if, and how well, all parts of the test contribute to the measurement of the construct.
An advantage of this approach is that it only requires a single test administration. Split- half reliability is a correlation between the total scores of the two halves, with each individual obtaining two scores, one for each half. For a normative test using a Likert response scale, which is the case for EMOTION, split-half reliability is calculated using Pearson Product Moment Correlation and the Spearman Brown formula.
Split-half reliability was computed using the UK sample (n=270) with a mean age of 43.31 (SD=12.60). The EMOTION scale as a whole appears to have an excellent split-half reliability, with a Spearman-Brown coefficient of .90.

5.3.	Test-retest Reliability
Test-retest reliability involves administering a test twice to the same respondents under similar conditions and comparing the results for each individual in order to determine the stability of the test scores over time. The more similar the scores on the first administration (Time1) are to the scores on the second administration (Time2), the greater the reliability. The Pearson Product Moment Correlation Coefficient gives us the correlation between the two administrations and ranges between 0 and 1. The closer the correlation is to 1, the greater the reliability.
The formula for the Pearson Product Moment Correlation is:

 
∑𝑛
 
(𝑋𝑖 − 𝑋)(𝑌𝑖 − 𝑌)
 
𝑟 = 	𝑖=1	
   
 
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
(𝑋𝑖 − 𝑋)2 √∑𝑛
 

 
(𝑌𝑖 − 𝑌)2
 


where 𝑋 and 𝑌 are the two samples’ means and X and Y are the values of each of the two variables.

For the EMOTION, test-retest reliability was calculated on a sample of UK working professionals (n=73) at two points in time, three weeks apart (three weeks between Time 1 and Time 2). Between Time 1 and Time 2, two items pertaining to the factors Tactfulness and Flexibility respectively were slightly optimised in order to increase the reliability of the assessment. Participants ranged in age from 20 to 65 years (μ = 46.51; σ =11.87) and 56.67% were female. Both managerial and non-managerial roles were represented. Test-retest reliability was computed from individual scores for all factors and was calculated using the Pearson Product Moment Correlation Coefficient. Table 11 shows the correlation coefficients between Time1 and Time2.
Table 11 Test re-test reliability of EMOTION across factors
Factors	r
Overall	0.92
Assertiveness	0.88
Dealing with Diversity	0.66
 
Expressing Emotions	0.80
Empathy	0.78
Flexibility	0.66
Mediation	0.77
Motivating Others	0.75
Optimism	0.75
Resilience	0.80
Self Confidence	0.83
Self-Regard	0.79
Self-Motivation	0.82
Self-Knowledge	0.80
Self-Control	0.75
Tactfulness	0.76

The test retest correlations are all above .66 for individual factors, indicating an acceptable level of consistency over time. All but two of the correlations are above .75, which can be considered very good, and the overall scale shows an excellent level of test retest reliability with a correlation of .92. Despite the short span between Time 1 and Time 2 (3 weeks), it is important to keep in mind that traits related to emotional intelligence are not as stable as traits related to personality, and therefore, lower levels of test retest reliability are to be expected.
 
6.	Validity
Validity is the extent to which an assessment measures the underlying construct, which in this case is emotional intelligence. In terms of psychometric validity, it relates to the degree to which evidence and scientific theory support the interpretations of the test scores. Reliability is a prerequisite for validity, but it does not guarantee it. It is therefore important to prove the assessment’s reliability and validity independently. A valid test enables test users to make valid associations between assessed traits or skills and organisational outcomes such as job commitment, motivation, job performance, and effectiveness. Established validity also protects organisations from faulty, costly, unethical and legally risky personnel decisions.
Face validity ensures that the test is reasonable to respondents and non-psychologists who may decide to use it. This is a superficial aspect of validity; however, it is crucial as it is likely that bad face validity would lead to less cooperation by respondents.
Content validity refers to item construction and analysis. This ensures that the tool is representative of the construct. To ensure items are being created to measure the construct, both experts and the literature on the field should be consulted.
Criterion-related validity is examined by comparing the questionnaire with other scales or variables. Concurrent validity is relevant to identification of existing attributes, while predictive validity is used to predict future outcomes.
Construct validity is concerned with determining the extent to which a scale measures the theoretical construct in question. Convergent validation involves exploring whether evidence from different methods indicates the same meaning of a construct. On the other hand, discriminant validation investigates whether unrelated constructs are uncorrelated.
Cross validation is when the test is administered to a different set of respondents than those that it will be administered to for the final version. It is important to establish the questionnaire with different samples in order to control against random sampling errors.
The following methods were used as they were deemed crucial for the validation of
EMOTION: Criterion, construct and consequential validity (DIF).


6.1	Criterion (Concurrent) Validity
Concurrent validity allows a new method to be validated against a tried and tested one. If two tests that are believed to measure closely related attributes correlate strongly, then the new method can be deemed valid. Concurrent validity relies on the two tests being taken at the same time or with little time between them so that the correlation is pure and unaltered by changes over time.
6.1.1	EMOTION and IPIP
Concurrent validity for EMOTION was established using factors from Barchard’s (2001) Emotional Intelligence Scale and from Gough’s (1996) California Psychological Inventory, which were sourced from the International Personality Item Pool (Goldberg et al., 2006). The International Personality Item Pool (IPIP) is a collection of 3329 public domain personality items. The project was initiated in 1996 and is freely available in over 25 languages. There are over 250 different IPIP scales measuring 230 different constructs similar to their parent scales, such as the NEO-PI-R (Costa & McCrae, 1992), 16 Personality Factor Questionnaire (16PF: Conn & Rieke, 1994), and California Psychological Inventory (CPI: Gough & Bradley, 1996). All scales can be found in an alphabetical index and be compiled as desired.
 
The IPIP questionnaire for this study was extracted from the IPIP Website (http://ipip.ori.org/). The IPIP website is an online scientific computer supported system that contains psychometric characteristics for IPIP scales, keys for scoring scales, and numerous items related to personality or other constructs, that facilitate the development of research into personality and other individual differences.
The sample of 270 UK professionals took both EMOTION and IPIP at the same time. The authors of EMOTION selected 5 IPIP factors (3 factors from Barchard (2001) (Attending to Emotions, Empathic Concern, and Negative Expressivity), and 2 factors from Gough & Bradley (1996) (Optimism and Assertiveness)) which were considered to be related to 9 out of the 15 EMOTION factors based on item similarity and commonality of concepts. IPIP items are similar to EMOTION items in that they are short verbal phrases. The final IPIP scale is comprised of 50 items, which ask the respondent to rate how much they agree with the statements provided; all items are measured on a 4-point Likert scale, the same one that is used for EMOTION, where respondents need to specify their level of agreement or disagreement with each item (1 = This does not describe me at all, 2 = This describes me a little, 3 = This describes me fairly well, 4 = This describes me very well). IPIP contains five factors: Assertiveness (taking control of situations and being dominant), Attending to Emotions (recognising and understanding emotions), Empathic Concern (sympathy and concern for others), Negative Expressivity (openly expressing feelings), and Optimism (positive well-being). Assertiveness was selected because it is similar to EMOTION’s Assertiveness and Self-control; Attending to Emotions was selected because it is similar to Expressing Emotions; Empathic Concern was selected because it is similar to EMOTION’s Empathy and Mediation; Negative Expressivity was selected as because it is similar to EMOTION’s Expressing Emotions; and Optimism was selected because it is similar to EMOTION’s Optimism, Self-knowledge and Resilience.
A strong correlation of .67 was found between the two scales’ global scores, which demonstrates that EMOTION has excellent concurrent validity and is a valid measure of emotional intelligence. Table 12 shows the correlation between the individual EMOTION factors and the IPIP factors.

Table 12 Correlation between EMOTION factors and IPIP Factors
IPIP Factors

Assertiveness	
Empathic Concern	
Attending to Emotions	
Negative Expressivity	
Optimism
AST	0.47	0.21	0.08	0.36	0.22
DWD	0.26	0.36	0.08	-0.02	0.32
EMP	0.37	0.24	0.25	0.26	0.21
EEM	0.5	0.35	0.33	0.44	0.32
FLE	0.33	0.12	0.14	0.10	0.56
MED	0.45	0.27	0.14	0.06	0.34
MOO	0.46	0.32	0.16	0.13	0.26
OPT	0.38	0.11	0.09	0.11	0.73
RES	0.21	-0.04	-0.12	0.03	0.68
 
 
IPIP Factors

Assertiveness	
Empathic Concern	
Attending to
Emotions	
Negative Expressivity	
Optimism
SCO	0.46	0.07	-0.02	0.13	0.63
SCN	-0.05	-0.01	0.02	-0.22	0.46
SKN	0.28	0.05	0.07	0.13	0.60
SMO	0.29	0.19	0.08	0.09	0.57
SRE	0.37	0.05	0.03	0.1	0.66
TAC	0.25	0.15	0.13	-0.06	0.46
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ EMP – Empathy ◦ FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self- confidence ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SCN – Self-control ◦ TAC – Tact


The table above shows strong correlations between the IPIP factors and the EMOTION factors. As expected some of the EMOTION factors correlated strongly with the IPIP factors. IPIP’s Optimism correlated highly with EMOTION’s Optimism (.73), Resilience (.68), Self-knowledge (.60), and Self-regard (.66); this is due to IPIP’s Optimism being defined as positive well-being, and therefore measuring similar constructs to EMOTION’s Self-regard (knowing your strengths and limitations), Self-knowledge (knowing your own emotions, needs and desires), Resilience (being able to recover from stressful and adverse situations), and Optimism (being able to face situations with a positive attitude).
There were some negative correlations between IPIP and EMOTION factors, meaning that if someone scores highly on a factor it is likely that they will score lower on the other. For example, IPIP’s Negative Expressivity and EMOTION’s Self-control (-.22), which is due to the fact that Negative Expressivity is about individuals openly expressing how they are feeling, while Self-control is about an individual controlling their emotions and only expressing how they are feeling calmly. However, these negative correlations are not significant. Each EMOTION factor had a good correlation of above .36 with at least one of the IPIP factors, showing that the IPIP factors selected correlate strongly overall with EMOTION, indicating a strong level of criterion validity.

6.2	Construct Validity
Construct validity measures the degree to which a test measures what it claims to measure. Construct validity is essential to the overall validity (perceived and actual) of a scale. When a construct is not clearly defined, direct inferences are unable to be made between construct and other behaviours (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955). Often there is no accepted unit of measurement for constructs and even fairly well known ones, such as intelligence, are open to debate. The construct validity of a scale may therefore be threatened if a construct is: a) either too broad or too narrow; b) mislabelled as a specific dimension of or component within the construct; c) confounded by other related constructs that mask the effects of the main construct; or d) developed with insufficient research. Therefore, in order to develop a scale that measures emotional intelligence, the construct must reflect known theories that define emotional intelligence, identify the components that comprise it and pin point positive and negative behaviours associated with each dimension.
 
Construct validity is particularly important for work based tests, as it adds legitimacy and acceptability to the standardised measurement of employee behaviour. Construct validity also facilitates an understanding of organisational implications of findings, while enabling organisations and individuals to tailor interventions to meet desired performance targets. Two approaches were used to establish construct validity in EMOTION: Inter-Factor Correlations and Confirmatory Factor Analysis.
6.2.1	Inter-Factor Correlations
The factors in EMOTION all measure emotional intelligence, however they all measure different aspects of emotional intelligence and therefore, some factors may have opposing meanings. In other words, if someone scores highly on a factor, it does not necessarily mean that they will score highly on all factors. A correlation between the factors can be found in Table 13.
Table 13 Correlation between EMOTION factors
	AST	DW D	EM P	EEM	FLE	ME D	MO O	OPT	RES	SCO	SCN	SK N	SM O	SRE	TAC
AST	1.00														
DW D	0.05	1.00													
EM P	0.33	0.03	1.00												
EEM	0.52	0.27	0.25	1.00											
FLE	0.21	0.41	0.27	0.33	1.00										
ME D	0.28	0.05	0.55	0.21	0.40	1.00									
MO O	0.30	0.14	0.44	0.22	0.36	0.66	1.00								
OPT	0.28	0.25	0.24	0.39	0.49	0.33	0.27	1.00							
RES	0.22	0.24	0.13	0.31	0.38	0.18	0.10	0.69	1.00						
SCO	0.45	0.18	0.29	0.41	0.43	0.31	0.28	0.64	0.64	1.00					
SCN	- 0.23	
0.19	
0.03	- 0.05	
0.29	
0.17	
0.07	
0.30	
0.41	
0.25	
1.00				
SK N	0.27	0.21	0.18	0.38	0.34	0.13	0.10	0.52	0.60	0.63	0.40	1.00			
SM O	0.18	0.39	0.12	0.33	0.53	0.28	0.32	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.44	0.51	1.00		
SRE	0.39	0.22	0.22	0.42	0.41	0.18	0.19	0.65	0.66	0.80	0.28	0.62	0.43	1.00	
TAC	0.02	0.13	0.40	0.12	0.39	0.58	0.38	0.41	0.36	0.33	0.58	0.35	0.43	0.31	1.00
AST – Assertiveness ◦ DWD – Dealing with Diversity ◦ EMP – Empathy ◦ EEM – Expressing Emotions ◦ FLE – Flexibility ◦ MED – Mediation ◦ MOO – Motivating Others ◦ OPT – Optimism ◦ RES – Resilience ◦ SCO – Self- confidence ◦ SCN – Self-control ◦ SKN – Self-knowledge ◦ SMO – Self-motivation ◦ TAC – Tact ◦ SRE – self- regard


The correlations in the table above demonstrate the relationships between the various aspects of emotional intelligence measured by EMOTION. As predicted some factors correlate highly, while others demonstrate negative correlations. Resilience and optimism are highly correlated (.69); which can easily be explained by the fact that individuals who
 
easily recover after a difficult event (resilience), need to remain positive and optimistic about the future to do so (Optimism). Self-confidence and Self-regard also correlated highly (0.80 which could be due to the fact that those who believe in their own worth (Self- regard) will also be more likely to believe in their own abilities (Self-confidence). Self- control and Assertiveness correlated negatively with one another (-0.23), which can be explained by the fact that individuals who are assertive give their opinion more freely and do not hold back, while those who have high self-control might refrain from speaking their mind as spontaneously because they are in control of their reactions.
6.2.2	Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)
To investigate the theoretical constructs or factors that may be represented by a set of items as well as the quality of individual items, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) are usually performed. EFA and CFA are both forms of factor analysis. Factor analysis examines the factors (hypothetical constructs) of an assessment which are developed to interpret clusters of strong inter-correlations between items in a correlation matrix. Factor analysis aims to simplify a range of items into a few common variables; these can be identified by extracting and grouping items which have high correlations on a factor to reveal the common variables.
The goal of EFA is to identify and maximise the importance of each dimension (percentage of variance), while CFA is a hypothesis driven approach that determines the degree to which observed indicators reflect the underlying construct by specifying the number of dimensions expected and then classifying the value of expected relationships (Schreiber, Nora, Stage, Barlow & King, 2006). In doing so, CFA provides a numerical estimate of the degree to which the proposed factor structure is an accurate fit of the phenomenon in the real world. CFA therefore investigated the degree to which measures of a construct are consistent with established understanding and theoretical arguments for that construct.
A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with continuous factor indicators was conducted in order to check the convergence of the results with the model of the assessment. CFA is a form of factor analysis used to measure that a construct is consistent with its intended meaning. There are two key approaches to confirming the factor structure of a scale. A strict confirmatory approach is one in which a model is tested using structural equation modelling (SEM) goodness of fit tests to determine if the model specified by the research is consistent with the data. On the other hand, an alternative model approach allows two or more models to be tested to identify which has the best fit. For the development of EMOTION, a strict confirmatory approach was adopted as there is only one formulated model for EMOTION. EMOTION is polytomous in nature, meaning that the items are restricted but not binary, and therefore it lends itself well to CFA. This also helped confirm the existence of a global EMOTION score.
CFA is used to determine how well the model fits the data, and therefore evaluating the goodness of fit indices is crucial. Several statistical tests are used to determine how well the model fits the data in CFA and SEM. The closer fit indices meet statistical requirements, the better the model. The Chi Square (X²) statistic is considered the primary index of goodness-of-fit. However, due to problems associated with reliance on the X² (sensitivity to sample sizes and inappropriateness when distributional assumptions are violated), measures of relative fit are strongly recommended. The X² is a measure of absolute fit, and provides a fundamental indication of how well the proposed theory fits the data and does not rely on comparison with a baseline model (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1993).
For the validation of EMOTION, the Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA, Steiger & Lind, 1980), the Bentler Comparative Fit Index (CFI), and the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) were chosen as additional measures of fit, as they are the least likely to be affected by sample size (Fan, Thompson & Wang, 1999). Furthermore, using a variety of
 
indices is necessary as different indices reflect different aspects of model fit (Hooper, Coughlan & Mullen, 2008). Like the X², the RMSEA is a measure of absolute fit that assesses the amount of error associated with a proposed model. The lower the RMSEA, the more robust the model; indices of .05 or below are considered to be a good fit (Hu & Bentler, 1999). This is because RMSEA is related to the residuals in the model and assesses the degree to which the proposed model is inaccurate. Both the CFI and TLI are incremental or relative fit indices that assess overall improvement of a proposed model compared with an independence model where observed variables are uncorrelated (Hooper et al., 2008; Holtzman & Vezzu, 2011). While higher values of the CFI and TLI (.9 and above) indicate an excellent fit, it should be noted that a CFI or TLI of .90 or higher may not necessarily correspond to a RMSEA of .05 or less (Hu & Bentler, 1999).
One CFA analysis was conducted. Table 14 shows the goodness of fit indices and model results.


Table 14
Confirmatory Factor Analysis

CFA	
N	
X2	
df	
X2/df	
p	
RMSEA	low 90%
C.I.	high 90%
C.I.	
CFI	
TLI
	270	17521.23	3916	4.47	0.000	0.05	0.05	0.05	0.79	0.78



The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) confirmed that the 15 factors are independent of each other.
From the CFA analysis, it can be concluded that the construct measured in EMOTION is therefore applicable in ‘real world’ situations. The fact that the analyses converged also demonstrates that EMOTION does not measure external factors or other related constructs, and instead it only measures what it intended to.

6.3	Consequential Validity

6.3.1	Differential Item Functioning

An item functions differently, or displays differential item functioning (DIF), if respondents from different groups have different probabilities of endorsing the item, despite having the same level of the trait. When a different probability of endorsing an item remains constant across different levels of the trait, the DIF is said to be uniform (Figure 1). Here, the item of interest consistently gives one group an advantage across all levels of the trait, even when the groups are matched on ability. Conversely, when a different probability of endorsing an item varies along the level of the trait, the DIF is characterised as non- uniform (Clauser & Mazor, 1998; Hanson, 1998). Rather than a consistent advantage being given to the reference group across the ability continuum, an advantage to one group over another exists at different levels of the trait. For instance, an item may give the reference group an advantage at the higher end of the continuum, while a disadvantage at the lower end (Figure 1).
 
 

Figure 1. Item Characteristic curves with uniform DIF (left) and non-uniform DIF (right).

Traditionally testing for the presence of DIF under the logistic regression framework is based on likelihood ratio χ2 test (Swaminathan & Rogers, 1990). Initially used for dichotomous items, this technique was then extended for polytomous items, in which case the proportional-odds logistic regression model (Agresti, 1990) is used.

The logistic regression procedure, as used in EMOTION to assess DIF, focuses on one item after the other, looking for differences between groups when participants are matched on similar level of trait. The matching criterion is the IRT score of each factor.

For each item, different nested models are fit to the data to test the null hypotheses (no difference between the groups) and the alternative hypotheses (a: there is a difference between groups or b: there is a difference between groups, and this difference is not constant across all trait levels):

Model 0: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk
Model 1: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk + β1 * trait level
Model 2: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk + β1 * trait level + β2 *group
Model 3: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk + β1 * trait level + β2 *group + β2 * trait level * group

Where P(ui ≥ k) is the cumulative probabilities that the item response falls in response option k or higher, and αk are the intercepts.

The log-likelihood of each of the 3 models are recorded. Uniform DIF (df = 1) is tested by comparing the log likelihood values for Model 1 and Model 2, non-uniform DIF (df = 1) by comparing Model 2 and Model 3, and the global overall DIF (df = 2) effect by comparing Model 1 and Model 3. These comparisons are performed with the likelihood ratio χ2 statistic.

Criteria for detecting DIF:
Items were flagged as DIF if any of the three likelihood ratio χ2 statistics was significant. Significance level was fixed at alpha =.01 (due to multiple comparison). Moreover, Cox and Snell (1989), Nagelkerke (1991), and McFadden (Menard, 2000) pseudo R2 were reported as a magnitude effects. The level of the effect size provided by the difference
 
between the R2 coefficients of the nested models were classified as "negligible" (<.13), "moderate" (.13 to .26) or "large" (>.26) based on Zumbo and Thomas’ (1997) scale of DIF effect.
Purification process:
Ordinal logistic regression uses IRT factor scores as a matching criterion for detecting DIF, assuming that all items except the item of interest are DIF free. Iterative purification is a process used in order to determine whether the IRT factor score was already biased prior to running an ordinal logistic regression analysis, due to items with DIF being included in the scale. It iteratively recalculates the matching criterion and the DIF, by using just the items which are identified as non DIF. Iterative purification therefore reduces the effect of DIF on the factor estimates which are used for matching criterion (Choi, Gibbons & Crane, 2011).
Gender and age differences were separately subjected to DIF analyses for each factor. Analyses were performed using R software version 3.3.1 and the Lordif package for R (Choi, Gibbons & Crane, 2011).


Table 15 DIF Table

McFadd en		Nagelkerke	Cox&Sn ell	

Factor	ite m	nca t	chi 12	chi 13	ch i2 3	bet a12	
R2
12	R2
13	
R2
23	R2
12	R2
13	R2
23	
R2
12	R2
13	
R2
23
Study Group															

Optim ism	
3	
4	0.
00
0	
0.0
00	0.
9
9
3	
0.0
33	
0.0
27	0.
0
2
7	
0.0
00	0.
0
2
5	0.
0
2
5	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
23	0.
0
2
3	
0.0
00

Flexib ility	
2.0
00	
4.0
00	0.
00
0	
0.0
00	0.
9
6
3	
0.0
72	
0.0
31	0.
0
3
1	
0.0
00	0.
0
3
6	0.
0
3
6	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
33	0.
0
3
3	
0.0
00
Self- Contr ol	
2.0
00	
4.0
00	0.
00
8	
0.0
25	0.
6
1
7	
0.0
09	
0.0
10	0.
0
1
1	
0.0
00	0.
0
2
0	0.
0
2
1	0.
0
0
1	
0.0
19	0.
0
1
9	
0.0
01
Self- Contr ol	
4.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
0	
0.0
00	0.
6
7
3	
0.0
74	
0.0
32	0.
0
3
2	
0.0
00	0.
0
4
1	0.
0
4
2	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
38	0.
0
3
9	
0.0
00
Self- Motiv ation	
6.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
5	
0.0
19	0.
9
9
9	
0.0
21	
0.0
11	0.
0
1
1	
0.0
00	0.
0
2
3	0.
0
2
3	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
21	0.
0
2
1	
0.0
00
Self- Regar d	
2.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
0	
0.0
00	0.
8
0
3	
0.0
78	
0.0
29	0.
0
2
9	
0.0
00	0.
0
4
2	0.
0
4
2	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
38	0.
0
3
9	
0.0
00
Self- Regar d	
4.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
1	
0.0
03	0.
7
5
8	
0.0
66	
0.0
17	0.
0
1
7	
0.0
00	0.
0
1
9	0.
0
2
0	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
18	0.
0
1
8	
0.0
00
Gend er															

Empa thy	
1.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
2	
0.0
09	0.
7
0
0	
0.0
15	
0.0
14	0.
0
1
5	
0.0
00	0.
0
1
6	0.
0
1
6	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
14	0.
0
1
4	
0.0
00
 


Media tion	
1.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
2	
0.0
01	0.
0
2
0	
0.0
16	
0.0
14	0.
0
2
2	
0.0
08	0.
0
2
3	0.
0
3
6	0.
0
1
3	
0.0
21	0.
0
3
3	
0.0
12
Self- knowl edge	
2.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
0	
0.0
00	0.
6
2
3	
0.0
31	
0.0
25	0.
0
2
5	
0.0
00	0.
0
2
8	0.
0
2
9	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
26	0.
0
2
7	
0.0
00
Self- knowl edge	
3.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
9	
0.0
33	0.
8
8
8	
0.0
76	
0.0
11	0.
0
1
1	
0.0
00	0.
0
2
4	0.
0
2
4	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
22	0.
0
2
2	
0.0
00
Tactfu lness	
4.0
00	
4.0
00	
0.
00
5	
0.0
20	0.
9
8
1	
0.0
20	
0.0
12	0.
0
1
2	
0.0
00	0.
0
2
5	0.
0
2
5	0.
0
0
0	
0.0
23	0.
0
2
3	
0.0
00

DIF Analysis: Gender
In order to discover if items performed differently across gender, we first defined two groups of professionals by gender (males and females). These analyses were conducted to ensure that all of the items were interpreted in the same way by participants of either gender, and that there was not a bias towards either males or females.
DIF Analysis: Participants
Analyses were conducted with a total of 270 participants all from the UK norm sample. Participants were separated in two groups according to their gender. 153 women (56.67%) aged from 18 to 65 years (M=41.90; SD=12.57) and 117 men (43.33%) aged from 19 to 64 years (M=45.17; SD=12.46) were included in the analysis.

DIF Analysis: Results
Five items were flagged for DIF by gender. Analyses identified one item each for Empathy, Mediation, Tactfulness and two items for Self-Knowledge. No non-uniform DIF was found in these items except for Mediation. However, for all items that were flagged, the size effects, as indicated by the pseudo R2, were all below .04, which is far below Zumbo’s (1999) threshold of .13. Therefore, they are considered negligible.
No DIF was flagged for the other 11 factors and the results of these analyses show that the majority of items (84 out of 89) on EMOTION do not function differently across genders. Table 15 shows the Likelihood Ratio χ2 Statistics for this analysis; all items with demonstrated DIF have been included in this table. Uniform DIF is displayed as χ212, while non-uniform DIF is displayed as χ223, and global DIF is displayed as χ213.

One item displaying DIF was chosen to graphically illustrate uniform DIF in EMOTION with relation to gender. Figure 2 displays analyses of the one item for Empathy, which has negligible gender differences. The focal group (males) is slightly less likely to endorse the item than the focal group (females) for all ability levels. The fourth graph shows the minimal effect size of the item.
 
 

Figure 2. Graphical display of the item "1" for the factor Empathy which illustrates non- uniform DIF with respect to gender.

The top left graph displays the item characteristic curves (ICCs) for the item for male (dotted curve) vs. female (solid curve) professionals based on item true-score functions. The Logistic Regression χ2 test for non-uniform DIF (χ223) was not significant (p=.7), whereas uniform DIF (χ212) was significant (p=.002). The slope of the function for males was slightly lower than that for females at all theta levels, further indicating a uniform DIF.
The top right and the bottom right graphs both show the absolute difference between the ICCs for male and female professionals. The top right graph illustrates the difference in scores between groups along the continuum of trait level (theta score), and shows that the small difference in item true score function is present only at a middle level for the trait Empathy. The bottom right graph shows this same difference in score between groups but weighted by the score distribution of the focal group, thus indicating that the impact of the difference between the item score of the two groups is actually minimal.
The bottom left graph shows the item response functions for the two groups separately for each response options. Slope (discrimination parameter) and category threshold values (difficulty parameters at the intersection of categories response options) are printed on the left of the graph. Difference between groups on the slope parameters (2.91 for men, 1.94 for women) is an indicator of uniform DIF, which is confirmed by the visual inspection of the graph “item true score function” (top left figure). The category threshold values, calculated for each group, indicate at which point of the response option the difference between groups occurs.
 





































Figure 4. Test Characteristic curves for males and females on the factors: Empathy (Top left), Mediation (Top Right), Self-Knowledge (Bottom left) and Tactfulness (Bottom right)



At the trait level, the distributions of the estimated theta scores for Empathy, Mediation, Self-Knowledge and Tactfulness are very similar across both genders and broadly overlap. However there are slight differences: men obtain slightly more medium level theta estimates but less high level estimates than females on empathy. For Mediation the theta estimates are extremely similar but with male estimates fluctuating slightly at the higher theta levels. The Self-Knowledge trait distribution shows that females obtain slightly lower level theta estimates but male obtain more medium and high levels. As for Tactfulness males obtained slightly more mid-level theta estimates (see Figure 3).


The test characteristic curves shown in Figure 4. compare the expected total scores for groups at each level of the underlying trait (theta). This comparison is made with all the items in a factor (the left graph of each pair), and with the subset of items in each factor
 
found to have DIF (the right graph of each pair). The small area between the curves in the graphs comparing all items for the traits of Empathy, Mediation, Self-Knowledge and Tactfulness, indicate that the DIF items had minimal impact on the total expected score at any level of the underlying trait.
 



 	 





Figure 5. The graph above shows Individual-level DIF impact for Empathy, Mediation, Self-Knowledge and Tactfulness. The graphs above compare the initial theta estimate (which include DIF items) and the purified theta estimates from the final run accounting for DIF. The median difference over all respondents which is represented by the thick black line on the left graph at roughly 0.00. The box and whisker plots all illustrate an interquartile range (the shaded box), ranging from roughly -0.01 to
+0.01. The solid line on the scatterplot illustrates where the median would be if there was no DIF, a dotted line depicts the mean of differences and it is evident that the DIF on these factors is extremely small.








Conclusion: Overall, the results of DIF analyses for gender showed that only 5 items out of 89 displayed a DIF effect. Moreover, the impact of the 5 items with DIF was minimal,
 
with the effect sizes associated with each item being negligible. Therefore, we can conclude that EMOTION questionnaire is appropriate for use for both male and female professionals without causing any discrimination, and practitioners can be confident of obtaining valid, representative and fair results from its use.



DIF Analysis: Study level
In order to discover if items performed differently across Study level, we defined two groups of professionals by study level, Higher education (Bachelor’s degree and above) and those without higher education. These analyses were conducted to ensure that all of the items were interpreted in the same way by participants regardless of education level, and that there was not a bias towards either.
DIF Analysis: Participants
Analyses were conducted with a total of 270 participants all from the UK norm sample. Participants were separated in two groups according to their study level. The higher education group consisted of 112 participants (41.48%) aged from 20 to 64 years (M=41.21; SD=12.46) and the non-higher educated group consisted of 158 participants (58.52%) aged from 18 to 65 years (M=44.80; SD=12.53).

DIF Analysis: Results

Three items were flagged for DIF by Study level. Analyses identified one item each for Optimism, Resilience, Self-confidence, Self-Knowledge and Self-Motivation. Two items were identified for Self-Regard. No non-uniform DIF was found in any of the items except for resilience, which showed both uniform and non-uniform DIF. The size of the effects however, as indicated by the pseudo R2, were negligible: <.05, which is far below Zumbo’s (1999) threshold of .13 indicating a negligible size effect.
No DIF was flagged for the other 9 factors and the results of these analyses show that the majority of items (82 out of 89) on EMOTION do not function differently across study level. Table 15 shows the Likelihood Ratio X2 Statistics for this analysis; all items with demonstrated DIF have been included in this table. Uniform DIF is displayed as χ212, while non-uniform DIF is displayed as χ223, and global DIF is displayed as χ213.
 
   



Figure 6. Trait distributions for the factors of Flexibility, Optimism, Self-Control, Self-Motivation and Self-Regard
 
At the trait level, the distributions of the estimated theta scores for Flexibility, Optimism, Self-Control, Self-Motivation and Self-Regard are very similar across both study levels and broadly overlap. However there are slight differences. The higher education group obtains slightly more medium level theta estimates for the factors of Flexibility and Self- Regard. On the other hand they obtain slightly less medium level theta estimates for the factors of Self-Control and Self-Motivation. These differences are however, negligible (see Figure 6).
 
 





Figure 7. Test Characteristic curves for males and females on the factors: Flexibility (Top left), Optimism (Top Right), Self-Control (Middle left,)Self-Motivation (Middle right) and Self-regard (Bottom left).
 
The test characteristic curves shown in Figure 7. compare the expected total scores for groups at each level of the underlying trait (theta). This comparison is made with all the items in a factor (the left graph of each pair), and with the subset of items in each factor found to have DIF (the right graph of each pair). The small area between the curves in the graphs comparing all items for the traits of Flexibility, Optimism, Self-Control, Self- Motivation, and Self-regard, indicate that the DIF items had minimal impact on the total expected score at any level of the underlying trait.
 
 

Figure 8. The graph above shows Individual-level DIF impact for Flexibility, Optimism, Self-Control, Self- Motivation and Self-Regard. The graphs above compare the initial theta estimate (which include DIF items) and the purified theta estimates from the final run accounting for DIF. The median difference over all respondents which is represented by the thick black line on the left graph at roughly 0.00. The box and whisker plots all illustrate an interquartile range (the shaded box), ranging from roughly -0.01 to +0.01. The solid line on the scatterplot illustrates where the median would be if there was no DIF, a dotted line depicts the mean of differences and it is evident that the DIF on these factors is extremely small.
 

Conclusion: The results of DIF analyses for Study level showed that only 7 items out of 89 displayed a DIF effect. Moreover, the impact of the 7 items with DIF was minimal, with the effect sizes associated with each item being negligible. Therefore, we can conclude that EMOTION questionnaire is appropriate for use on all education levels without causing any discrimination, and practitioners can be confident of obtaining valid, representative and fair results from its use.


Overall the results of the DIF analyses for both gender and study level show that 12 items out of 89 were flagged for DIF, however each of these had a negligible effect size. The impact of DIF on the TCCs of all dimension was non-significant and so we know that the EMOTION Questionnaire has a very high consistency of measurement regardless of gender or study level. Therefore we can conclude that EMOTION is an appropriate tool for use and will not cause discrimination based on gender or study level.
 
6.3.2	T-tests and ANOVAs
The DIF analyses demonstrate that EMOTION has high consequential validity and, although a few items were flagged with DIF, they had a negligible impact on the overall assessment meaning that the questionnaire does not have bias towards any gender or study level. Therefore, any significant differences found between genders, age groups, or study levels are due to real differences and not biases of the questionnaire. To further explore the differences between the groups, t-tests and ANOVAS were performed between genders, age groups and study levels (see Tables 16-18).

Gender:
In order to check for differences in scores between genders, an independent samples t- test was conducted to compare all EMOTION factors between females (n=163) and males (n=121).


Table 16 t-Test table

	Female	Male	T	df	p
Assertiveness	5.53	5.85	-1.16	268	0.25
Dealing with Diversity	4.99	4.91	0.33	268	0.74
Empathy	5.90	5.53	1.37	268	0.17
Expressing- Emotions	4.41	4.32	0.31	268	0.76
Flexibility	5.17	5.20	-0.10	216	0.92
Mediation	6.04	5.73	1.09	268	0.28
Motivating Others	6.16	5.70	1.62	268	0.11
Optimism	4.15	4.45	-1.00	268	0.32
Resilience	3.96	4.31	-1.14	268	0.25
Self Confidence	4.03	4.68	-2.35	268	0.02*
Self-Control	4.91	5.28	-1.44	268	0.15
Self- Knowledge	4.44	4.99	-2.09	268	0.04*
Self- Motivation	4.75	4.72	0.11	268	0.91
Self-Regard	3.97	5.02	-3.72	268	0.0002*
Tactfulness	5.97	5.99	-0.09	268	0.93

There was a significant difference between males and females for 3 of the 15 factors. Males scored significantly higher for Self-Confidence (M=4.68 vs F=4.03) (t(268)= -2.35, p=0.02), Self-Knowledge (M=4.99 vs F= 4.44) (t(268) = -2.09, p = 0.04) and Self-Regard (M=5.02 vs F= 3.97), (t(268) = -3.72, p=0.0002). This possibly confirms some societally constructed stereotypes that men have higher levels of Self-Confidence and Self-Regard than women. As men are expected to be more self-confident they may focus more on developing this aspect of their emotional intelligence than women do. However, due to the fact that no significance was found in any of the other factors, the results also disprove some other stereotypes, such as men being more assertive or women being more empathetic.
 
Study level:
Participants were separated into five groups according to their study level: Masters and PhDs (n=27), Bachelor’s degrees (n=85), 2 years vocational study (n=60), High school diploma (n=74) and trades training without study (n=24).

Table 17 Study Level ANOVA Table


N=270	Trades Training
/ No studies	High school diploma	2 years vocation al study	Bachelor ’s degree	
Masters
/ PhD	
F	
p
Factor	Mea n	sd	Mea n	sd	Mea n	sd	Mea n	sd	Mea n	sd		
Assertiven	5.2	2.5	5.8	2.2	5.7	2.2	5.6	2.1	5.7	2.2	0.3	0.86
ess		1	1	5	6	2	1	9	1	7	3	
Dealing with Diversity	
4.7	2.0
5	4.8
6	2.0
4	4.9
6	2.0
2	5.1
8	1.9
9	4.7
1	1.5
6	0.5
5	
0.70
Empathy	5	2.2	5.8	2.2	5.8	2.3	5.8	2.0	5.6	2.1	0.7	0.55
		5	3	8		7	6	2	2	4	6	
Expressing	3.1	2.0	4.5	2.5	4.4	2.1	4.5	2.3	4.2	2.5	2.1	0.09
Emotions	8	9	4	5	4	7	5	9	6	8	1	
Flexibility	4.8	2.2	5.0	1.7	4.9	1.8	5.4	2.0	5.5	1.1	1.1	0.34
	3	1	9	4	5	8	3	4		9	5	
Mediation	4.7	2.0	5.9	2.4	5.4	2.1	6.2	2.3	6.8	2.0	4.2	0.00
	5	0			9	5	4	9	4	5	8	3*
Optimism	3.5	2.5	4.0	2.2	4.2	2.2	4.6	2.5	4.5	2.5	1.3	0.28
	4	8	1	9	4	7	6	2	6	1	0	
Motivating	4.8	2.2	5.6	2.5	6.0	1.9	6.2	2.3	6.4	2.2	2.5	0.04
Others	5	7	4	8	9	5	9		7	4	3	5*
Resilience	3.8	2.5	3.7	2.2	4.6	2.5	4.2	2.6	3.7	2.7	1.5	0.21
	5			6	8	8	5		8	4	1	
Self	4.3	2.4	4.1	2.1	4.3	2.3	4.5	2.3	3.9	2.2	0.3	0.83
Confidence	6	6	7	9	3	1	1	3	9	3	7	
Self-	4.9	1.4	4.6	2.2	5.4	2.3	5.3	2.0	4.6	1.6	2.0	0.09
Control	2		1	3	5	8	8	0	9	1	4	
Self-	4.4	2.4	4.5	2.0	4.6	1.9	5.0	2.3	4.0	2.1	1.3	0.26
Knowledge	5	9		6	9	8	8	1	6	9	6	
Self-	4.3	2.1	4.6	2.5	4.8	2.5	4.9	2.4	4.4	2.1	0.5	0.73
Motivation	5	5	2	2	8		3	5	5	6	1	
Self-	4.3	2.1	4.1	2.2	4.7	2.4	4.7	2.4	3.6	2.1	1.6	0.16
Regard	5	6	4	3	1	6	4	2	6	5	7	
Tactfulnes	5.5	2.0	5.9	1.9	5.9	2.2	6.1	1.9	5.8	1.9	0.4	0.76
s	7	3	9	5	1	7	7	3	9	7	6	

The ANOVA found that there were significant differences for two factors based on study level, which were Mediation and Motivating Others. Post hoc analysis was conducted using pairwise t-tests (bonferroni correction) in order to see where these differences occurred.

The Mediation difference was found to be between the masters/PhD group (M=6.84, SD=2.05) and the trades training group (M=4.75, SD =2.00), p=.012, with all others
 
being non-significant. This difference might be because to mediate requires analytical skills and being able to find the right arguments to please both parties, which to some degree is learned and improved during higher education.

For Motivating Others, post-hoc t-tests found that there was no significant difference between the five study level groups.



Age:
Participants were separated into six groups according to their age: 18-25 (n=23), 26-33 (n=49), 34-41 (n=44), 42-49 (n=57), 50-56 (n=48) and 57+ (n=49).
Table 18 Age ANOVA Table

N=270	18-25	26-33	34-41	42-49	50-56	57+		F	Sig
Factor	Me an	sd	Me an	sd	Me an	sd	Me an	sd	Me an	sd	Me an	sd		
Assertive	6.1	2.	5.6	2.	5.6	2.	5.5	2.	5.6	2.	5.7	2.	0.	0.9
ness	8	29	4	18	2	3	4	6	1	06	2	02	27	3
Dealing with Diversity	4.5
2	2.
19	4.6
4	2.
12	5.0
7	1.
7	5.0
8	1.
78	
5	2.
13	5.1
8	2.
01	0.
60	0.7
0
Empathy	6.4	1.	6.0	2.	5.7	2.	5.4	2.	4.9	2.	6.1	2.	2.	0.0
	1	7	5	09	1	12	7	18	9	46	8	2	28	51
Expressi
ng Emotions	3.7
7	1.
96	4.1
2	2.
63	4.9
9	2.
38	4.2
5	2.
59	4.5
2	2.
15	4.3
5	2.
34	1.
15	0.3
4
Flexibilit	4.9	1.	5.3	1.	5.2	2.	4.8	1.	5.1	1.	5.5	1.	1.	0.3
y	3	56	6	84	2	01	2	83	3	98	7	86	05	9
Mediatio	6.2	2.	6.0	2.	6.0	2.	5.2	2.	5.6	2.	6.4	1.	1.	0.1
n	7	28	8	55	3	41	9	4	1	15	8	97	90	0
Optimis	4.2	1.	4.4	2.	3.8	2.	3.9	2.	4.2	2.	4.9	2.	1.	0.2
m	3	7	2	38	5	58	6	49	6	66	2	21	26	9
Motivatin	6.3	2.	6.1	2.	5.7	2.	5.4	2.	5.9	2.	6.3	2.	1.	0.3
g Others	3	07	9	48	3	53	4	35	9	32	3	05	14	4
Resilienc	3.3	1.	4.1	2.	3.7	2.	3.9	2.	4.2	2.	4.8	2.	1.	0.1
e	2	74	8	62	9	57	6	44		71	1	51	82	1
Self Confiden ce	3.7
3	1.
57	4.4
1	2.
51	
4.1	2.
27	4.0
4	2.
34	4.3
7	2.
26	4.9
5	2.
22	1.
62	0.1
6
Self-	4.5	2.	4.6	1.	5.2	2.	4.9	2.	4.9	2.	5.8	1.	2.	0.0
Control	9	11	7	96	3	03	6	14	4	41	3	77	49	4*
Self- Knowled ge	3.9
4	1.
59	4.6
9	2.
56	4.6
2	2.
25	4.3
7	1.
71	4.6
6	2.
44	5.4
4	2.
07	2.
57	0.0
3*
Self- Motivatio n	4.2
2	1.
81	4.4
2	2.
27	4.5
5	2.
22	4.2
8	2.
45	4.8
2	2.
54	5.9
2	2.
55	3.
03	0.0
1*
Self-	4.2	1.	4.3	2.	4.6	2.	4.3	2.	3.9	2.	5.0	2.	1.	0.2
Regard	7	72		52		59	2	32	1	23	8	27	42	2
Tactfulne	6.2	1.	5.7	2.	6.1	1.	5.4	2.	5.8	1.	6.8	1.	3.	0.0
ss	3	59		18	2	76	2	31	2	97	3	71	28	1*
 
The ANOVA found that there were significant differences for the four factors Self-Control, Self-Knowledge, Self-Motivation and Tactfulness. Post hoc analysis was conducted using pairwise t-tests (Bonferroni correction) in order to see where these differences occurred.
The Self-Control and Self-Knowledge post-hoc t-tests found that there was no significant difference between the six age groups.
The Self-motivation difference was found to be for the 57+ group (M=5.92; SD=2.55) against the 26-33 group (M=4.42; SD=2.27) (p=.03) and the 42-49 group (M=4.28, SD=2.45) (p=.007), while all others are non-significant.
The Tactfulness difference was found to be for the 57+ group (M=6.83; SD=1.71) against the 42-49 group (M=5.42, SD=2.31) (p=.007), while all others are non-significant.
These differences might be due to the fact that emotional intelligence develops with age, so it is to be expected that the older age group has a higher level of emotional intelligence. This is especially true for Tactfulness which is honed through personal experience and which the older age group has in abundance.
1.	User information and applicability
Chapter summary
This chapter provides a brief overview of the information needed to use the assessment and its main applications. The CTPI-R is administered online. Additional information about specific uses or modes of administration can be obtained from customer service.

1.1	Main areas of application


The CTPI-R is intended for HR professionals and is designed in a way that enables it to be used globally, irrespective of the country or culture. It is intended for HR professionals. It can be used throughout an employee's career, for different purposes and at different levels:

Individuals	Teams	Organisations
Recruitment	Analysis of training needs	Management audit
Career Management	Team building	Succession planning
Personal development		Research
Workplace counseling		Corporate culture shift

It is particularly appropriate for the assessment of individuals holding a post-graduate diploma (Master's degree or higher) as well as for managers, although the content of the CTPI-R relates to personality characteristics that can be pertinent to various occupational fields.

However, due to the dimensions being measured, it is less suitable for the assessment of people with certain occupations (or who are being recruited for certain occupations), such as production line work or clerical positions. The main reason is that most of the personality dimensions included in the CTPI-R are meant to predict managerial performance (e.g. Control/Power or Developing others), which is not necessarily relevant to all types of occupations. The language level of some items can also be inappropriate in the assessment of people with a lower mastery of the English language.

Central Test offers other tools, such as the Professional Profile-2 and the Big Five Profile, better suited to these types of occupational fields. Another assessment, the Sales Profile-R, was specifically designed for sales positions and customer service jobs.

At present, the CTPI-R is only available in normative form. The CTPI-R questions are presented under different formats: 6-point Likert scales and multiple choice questions with 2, 3 or 4 options.

The questionnaire consists of 114 questions. There are 4 dimensions, under which there are 19 factors. Each factor includes 6 items.
 
In addition to the 19 factors, the CTPI-R questionnaire includes a social desirability scale. The social desirability items are integrated in the questionnaire with the items of other factors.
This method detects people's tendency to answer the questions in a way as to portray an overly positive image of themselves, providing the test-administrator with an indication of this tendency. However, scores obtained on this scale need to be interpreted carefully and considered together with the overall score pattern, as well as with other information about the person. It is important to note that the CTPI-R questionnaire does not include answers that are scored on more than one scale, with the exception of the social desirability scale.

CTPI-R is available in English, French, Spanish, German, Brazilian and Portuguese and will soon be available in Arabic. For more information on availability in a particular language, please contact the Central Test consulting service (consulting@centraltest.com).

1.2	User qualification

The CTPI-R questionnaire uses business vocabulary and is meant to be used by Human Resources, training and executive development professionals and psychologists. Every person who uses the CTPI-R for a professional assessment has to follow a preliminary training.

	Mode of administration

The CTPI-R is designed to be administered online, however a PDF version of the questionnaire can also be made available for offline administration if conditions do not allow an online administration of the test. The reports can only be generated online, therefore, if the test has been administered offline, the test-administrator has to enter the candidate's responses in the online version of the questionnaire.

Being a personality questionnaire, the CTPI-R can be administered from a distance and without supervision.

	Time required for administration

The table below gives an overview of the estimated time required for a complete administration of the test.
	Online	Offline

Preparation	A few seconds to send the standard e-mail
with the instructions	10 minutes to prepare the materials and give the
instructions
Administration	25-30 minutes	25-30 minutes

Scoring and profiling	
A few seconds	15 minutes (responses need to be entered in the online version of the questionnaire
to get the report)

Feedback	20 minutes to an hour depending on the field of application	20 minutes to an hour depending on the field of application
 
The test does not have a time restriction. However, candidates should be encouraged to answer the questions quickly, to avoid spending too much time thinking about each statement. It is always preferable to answer spontaneously to a personality questionnaire, as there is no right or wrong answer.

	Computer-generated reports

As with all other Central Test tools, the CTPI-R reports are flexible, customizable and available in several languages. Specific sections can be included into or excluded from the report depending on the needs of the administrator. There are two versions of the report, the company's version and the candidate's version, which can be configured separately.

1.3	Purchase, Conditions and Costs

The CTPI-R's purchase, conditions and cost vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply:

•	The CTPI-R was created for the following users: HR professionals, training managers, executive development professionals and psychologists. A preliminary training is compulsory. For more information on the training, please contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central Test's partners.

•	The CTPI-R can be ordered online after having followed the training or by contacting one of Central Test's offices or one of Central Test's partners worldwide.

•	This technical document is available and free to be downloaded for any Central Test registered user. The link is available from the documentation tab in your client account.

•	For information on the CTPI-R prices and related products and services, contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central test's partners.

2.	Conceptual framework and development

	Chapter Summary

This chapter describes the initial conceptual framework of the CTPI-R and its development. The CTPI-R is a revised version of the CTPI-Pro. It was developed on the basis of different theoretical and empirical models of personality at work, by considering the dimensions measured by existing personality questionnaires as well as the conceptual criteria used for other successful Central Test tools (namely the Professional Profile-2 and the Occupational Interest Inventory).
 
2.1	Conceptual Framework of CTPI-R

The first phase of development took place between 2004 and 2006. The development of the conceptual framework for the CTPI-Pro started with a study that aimed to identify the key elements necessary for the development of a comprehensive work personality assessment tool. This led to the creation of an initial model of personality.
This initial model of personality was critically reviewed by a panel of experts on management. The first version was launched in 2009 for the English speaking countries (and in 2010 for the French and Spanish speaking countries).

	Key facts of the development of the conceptual framework – the operational phase

In order to determine the most important scales (or dimensions) to be measured in the questionnaire, an extensive literature review and different data analyses were undertaken. This phase of development took two years and involved the following:

•	A review of all existing job related personality models and questionnaires. This included the work of H. B. Cattell and H. Eysenck, and also covered personality questionnaires such as the California Personality Inventory (CPI), 16PF, 15FQ+, FIRO scales, the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, the Kostick PAPI and the Ego state questionnaire based on Eric Bern’s TA theory.

•	A review of all the validation studies on the relationship between personality scales and job performance.

•	A review of the documentation (job profiles, evaluation processes, list of skills required) from our H.R. client organizations to determine which aspects of personality are relevant to the
 
The final questionnaire (CTPI-R – 2012) includes 114 questions measuring 19 factors organized under 4 dimensions. The dimensions and factors are summarized in the following table:



 
2.2	Descriptions of the dimensions People management
1. AFFILIATION	



Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to be kind, affectionate and open towards others at work.
Individuals with a high score on this dimension seek to create genuine bonds with their environment (colleagues, business partners, etc.), to listen to others and to express their feelings easily.
Individuals with a low score have a tendency to be rather distant and formal, and to share their views and impressions to a lesser extent.
(+) High score	Warm, amicable, pleasant
(-) Low score	Distant, solitary, detached


2. ASSERTIVENESS	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to express and defend one's opinions, rights and wishes in an open, yet correct manner.
People with a high score on this dimension do not hesitate to speak up and do not fear conflicts. They can make unpopular decisions when their assignments require them to.
People with a low score have a tendency to be compliant and to avoid conflicts. They may feel remorse for not
doing a favour or for defending their choices when this goes against the interests of others.
(+) High score	Firm, categorical, assertive
(-) Low score	Accommodating, conciliatory, easy to influence


3. CONTROL/POWER	



Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to seek control over the course of events, to have one's own way of doing things accepted, and to gain power.
People with a high score on this dimension like managing others and having high-status positions so they can intervene effectively and with authority.
People with a low score tend to leave others to act as they wish, thus being rather indulgent or seemingly
indifferent.
(+) High score	Intrusive, controlling, authoritative
(-) Low score	Indulgent, laissez-faire, non-intrusive
 
4. DEVELOPING OTHERS	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency and desire to support, mentor and encourage others in order to help them reach their potential and become more efficient.
People with a high score on this dimension like spending time helping everyone develop their individual abilities for the benefit of the team. They firmly believe in the potential in everyone, with no exceptions.
On the other hand, individuals with a low score believe that everyone is capable of self-management and that offering too much support can lead to inefficiency. They
prefer to spend more time with people whom they consider to be more talented than the others.
(+) High score	Provides support, encouragement, assistance
(-) Low score	Favors autonomy and self-learning

5. TACTICAL	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to be tactical and diplomatic when dealing with others.
People with a high score on this dimension tend to adapt their speech to the person they are talking to, in order to cajole them and win them over. They also tend to hide their real thoughts to prevent divulging personal information about themselves.
People with a low score tend to act spontaneously and to be straightforward, honest and candid, and this may
work against them.
(+) High score	Strategic, tactical thinking, calculating
(-) Low score	Spontaneous, authentic, ingenuous

6. TRUST	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to be trusting towards others.
People with a high score on this dimension tend to believe that human beings are naturally good. They trust others as long as nothing conspicuous arises, and can lack vigilance.
On the contrary, people with a low score tend to be constantly on the watch. Naturally suspicious, they often
question the information they receive, and the motivations behind people's actions.
(+) High score	Trusts others easily
(-) Low score	Alert, skeptical, suspicious
 
Perception mode

7. CONSCIENTIOUSNESS	



Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to carry out tasks in a thorough, meticulous and organised way.
People with a high score on this dimension need to produce very precise work and aim for perfection, which can reduce their productivity.
People with a low score do not take the time to review everything in detail and they have a tendency to be carefree, spontaneous and sometimes inaccurate, but
can work more quickly.
(+) High score	Meticulous, precise, conscientious
(-) Low score	Distracted, spontaneous, seeks efficiency


8. RATIONAL	



Definition	This dimension refers to the way information is perceived and judgments made.
People with high rationality make judgments based on actions and tend to make decisions considering concrete facts and results.
On the other hand, people with a low score on this dimension tend to base their decisions on their intuition and experience and to consider the underlying human
side of every situation.
(+) High score	Objective, factual, rational
(-) Low score	Sensitive, pays attention to his/her feelings


9. RULE CONSCIENTIOUS	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to strictly follow the rules and moral standards established by society. People with a high score on this dimension have a need for reference points and tend to follow established regulations. They may sometimes be rigid and too focused on procedure.
In contrast, people with a low score have a tendency to disregard certain rules when they hinder the successful completion of a project, thus thinking of the company's
interests.
(+) High score	Respectful of values, laws and procedures
(-) Low score	Permissive, tolerant, lenient
 
Self management

10. COMMITMENT	



Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to draw satisfaction from being dedicated to one's job.
People with a high score on this dimension have the need to be completely devoted and committed to their company, to the point of developing a personal identity with it.
In contrast, people with a low score have the tendency to maintain a certain distance and try to keep their
professional and private lives separate.
(+) High score	Involved, devoted, workaholic
(-) Low score	Separates private and professional lives


11. LIVELY	



Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to be energetic, outgoing and full of life.
People with a high score on this dimension have a tendency to handle situations in an active and vivid manner, and may even appear to be too lively in the eyes of certain people.
On the other hand, people with a low score are reserved, calm, serious, and think things through.
(+) High score	Energetic, enthusiastic, light-hearted
(-) Low score	Reserved, calm, composed


12. OPTIMISM	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to hold positive expectations and to easily recover from failures.

People with a high score on this dimension are optimistic by nature and tend to take responsibility for their own failures and accomplishments.

On the other hand, people with a low score are more
critical and prefer to have negative expectations in order to avoid being disappointed.
(+) High score	Hopeful, positive, recovers easily from failures
(-) Low score	Pessimistic, realistic, easily discouraged
 
13. SELF CONFIDENCE	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to have self- confidence, to believe in one's potential.

People with high scores rarely question themselves, sometimes as a result of being overly confident. They lack concern for what others think of them.

On the other hand, people with low scores have self-
doubt and are easily affected by criticism and have a greater need for recognition.
(+) High score	Confident, self-assured, audacious
(-) Low score	Lacks confidence, self-doubting


14. EMOTIONAL STABILITY	




Definition	This dimension refers to the ability to recognize one's own emotions and to control emotional reactions.

People with a high score on this dimension often have a stable mood and are not easily affected by external factors such as stress or pressure. In extreme situations, that could be seen as indifference.

People with a low score have less emotional control as portrayed by impulsive acts and passionate reactions.
(+) High score	Stable, imperturbable, self-controlled
(-) Low score	Emotional, impulsive, passionate


15. SURPASSING	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to be ambitious, driven and competitive.

People with a high score on this dimension like challenges and tend to set high goals for themselves. Moreover, they will do anything to reach and even surpass their goals.

On the other hand, people with a low score tend to feel satisfied with their current situation and do not seek to
surpass their objectives once they have reached them nor do they constantly set new goals for themselves
(+) High score	Ambitious, competitive, desire for success
(-) Low score	Satisfied with current situation
 
CHANGE MANAGEMENT


16. ACTION ORIENTED	




Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to take initiative, risks and choose action over reflection in order to make progress even if there is uncertainty.

People with a high score on this dimension do not hesitate to act and to take risks in order to reach their goals quickly and move forward.

People with a low score have a tendency to progress slowly and with caution, to allow time for reflection.
(+) High score	Reacts to change with action
(-) Low score	Reacts to change with reflection


17. ADAPTABILITY	




Definition	This dimension refers to the ability to adapt to change and novelty.

People with a high score on this dimension are flexible and are able to modify their behaviour according to the context, without being attached to a particular routine or habit.

People with a low score tend to resist change and have difficulty changing their habits.
(+) High score	Flexible, adapts well to change
(-) Low score	Inflexible, resists change


18. EXPERIMENTAL	




Definition	This dimension refers to the desire to explore and innovate, sometimes to the detriment of existent solutions.

People with high scores often try to test new methods and technology, to make day-to-day tasks easier, to find original solutions.

People with low scores tend to be conventional and
prefer to use proven methods. They value reliability when moving forward with projects.
(+) High score	Explorer, tests new methods
(-) Low score	Traditional, follows established methods
 
19. VISIONARY	





Definition	This dimension refers to the tendency to be a “visionary”, to understand trends and patterns and to anticipate future events, by taking into account all aspects of a project.

People with a high score have the need to make projections about future events, and to anticipate possible outcomes.

On the other hand, people with a low score on this dimension have a tendency to enjoy living in the present and are hesitant, even sceptical, about wanting to make
predictions too much.
(+) High score	Anticipative, turned towards the future
(-) Low score	Factual, pragmatic, focused on the present

 
3.	Statistics

	Chapter summary

This chapter describes the process of transforming raw scores into standardized scores which was done during the development of the CTPI-R. A description of the norms will be included in the manual that will be published soon.

3.1	Scaling

The CTPI-R uses a continuous scale ranging from 0 to 10 to measure personality attributes. 0 implies a low level and 10 implies a high level on the corresponding personality trait. As stated above, each factor includes 6 items with a total of 20 to 36 response options.

A numeric value is attributed to every response option. To calculate the score on each dimension, the value of every chosen answer is added. A score higher than 8 or lower than 2 is considered to be an extreme score.

3.2	Validity:

Validity is the extent to which a test measures what it is supposed to measure and is a judgment made on the basis of observation and statistical indicators. It is important for a test to be reliable at first in order for it to be valid. Validity may be explored and determined through various means:

	Face validity refers to the operationalization of the concept. It is to see whether "on its face" the test items seem like a good translation of the construct. This is probably the weakest way to try to demonstrate validity as it is highly subjective in nature. (Note that just because it is weak evidence doesn't mean that it is wrong. We need to rely on our subjective judgments for a number of practical purposes. It's just that this form of judgment won't be very convincing to others.) To improve the quality of face validity assessment we made it more systematic and objective in nature by sending the test items to our panel of experts for their review and on basis of their feedback, only items showing consistent agreement were finally retained in the test.

	Content validity refers to the extent the contents of the test (factor descriptions and items) present true functionality of the construct. This is again done by the panel of the experts. The test indicates good level of content validity as most of its contents are aligned with that of the experts.
 
	Criterion Validity of the test was examined by doing multiple regression analysis between test scores and objective criteria. Since this test is primary designed a competency assessment tool we had a lot of opportunity to test its correspondence with a number of objective criteria. The number and type of criteria were different from study to study but overall we included these criteria in our validity studies:
•	Supervisor’s rating
•	Number of promotions/ increment in last five years
•	Average time span between two promotions
•	Performance rating in annual appraisals
•	Average period of stay in a job



3.3	Reliability :
The reliability of a test is concerned with its precision of measurement. Formally, the reliability coefficient is defined by the ratio of true score variance to observed score variance, and varies between 0 (no reliability) and 1 (perfect reliability). It should be remembered that reliability estimates are always sample dependent. The greater the variation of scores in the group studied, the higher the measured estimate of reliability. A reliability coefficient of 0.4 to 0.6 is considered to be good in psychometrics to determine its precision. Due to vast differences in individual personality and behaviour, it is rare to find a coefficient higher than 0.6.
Internal consistency is measured using Cronbach's coefficient alpha. High values of Cronbach's coefficient alpha indicate a greater degree of consistency in scores, and generally more homogeneous scale content.
 
Given below is a table showing the internal reliability of the 19 factors of the CTPI-R. The average reliability coefficient for the test is 0.50.


Factors	Reliability
Action-oriented	0.50
Adaptability	0.61
Affiliation	0.57
Assertiveness	0.38
Control/Power	0.54
Conscientiousness	0.47
Developing others	0.53
Commitment	0.43
Lively	0.47
Experimental	0.67
Visionary	0.30
Optimism	0.35
Rational	0.40
Rule-conscientious	0.40
Self-confidence	0.36
Emotional stability	0.61
Surpassing	0.50
Tactical	0.57
Trust	0.62
 
Mean scores (Gender-wise)
Given below is the comparison of mean scores of males and females on all CTPI-R factors. Minor differences exist in the mean scores of certain factors, as highlighted.



Factors	Male
Mean Scores	Female
Mean Scores	Average
Mean Scores
Action-Oriented	4.2	4.2	4.2
Adaptability	4.7	4.9	4.8
Affiliation	6.0	5.8	5.9
Assertiveness	5.0	5.0	5.0
Control	4.7	4.7	4.7
Conscientiousness	4.8	4.9	4.8
Developing Others	6.5	6.7	6.6
Commitment	6.1	5.7	6.0
Lively	5.7	6.4	5.9
Experimental	6.4	5.9	6.2
Visionary	5.5	5.5	5.5
Optimism	6.5	6.6	6.6
Rational	5.8	5.1	5.5
Rule-Conscientiousness	6.1	6.3	6.2
Self-Confidence	6.4	6.1	6.3
Emotional Stability	5.9	5.5	5.8
Surpassing	5.7	5.4	5.6
Tactical	4.5	4.1	4.4
Trust	5.6	5.2	5.5





Gender	N
Males	633
Females	350
Total	983
 
Given below are a series of tables showing the correlations of each CTPI-R factor with the ítems that measure the particular factor:

Visionary
Q27	0.65
Q114	0.66
Q64	0.40
Q4	0.56
Q85	0.61
Q105	0.60

INTRODUCTION
The Sales Profile-R is one of Central Test‟s signature tests. It was first developed in 2006 and revised regularly since then.
The Sales Profile-R was conceived to assess an individual‟s sales potential by measuring his/her skills and motivations in the field of sales. This test is useful for recruitment as well as for career development, to assess training needs and to conduct sales force auditing.
With questions framed as real life scenarios, the Sales Profile-R highlights a candidate‟s strengths and weaknesses on the basis of 12 factors related to sales (e.g. Prospection, customer satisfaction), revealing an individual‟s selling style and area of expertise.
Today, the Sales Profile-R is available in several languages and appreciated by HR managers, psychologists and recruitment consultants all over the world.
In this manual, you will find useful information concerning the test‟s best administration practices, background information concerning the test‟s development and evolution as well as the test‟s psychometric properties.


1.	USER INFORMATION AND APPLICABILITY

This chapter provides a brief overview of the Sales Profile-R. It also covers the appropriate areas of application and best administration practices.

Additional information about specific uses or modes of administration can be obtained from local Central Test offices.

1.1	Main Areas of Application

	Table of the Factors Being Evaluated

The test provides a person's profile on the basis of 12 traits and aptitudes related to sales, which are grouped under 4 key dimensions (see table below).

Client Acquisition Skills	Business Development Skills	Negotiation Skills	Selling Skills
Prospecting	Networking	Understanding Needs	Sales-Acumen
Approaching Clients	Strategic Selling	Pitching	Charisma

Combativeness	Customer Satisfaction	
Closing Deals	
Self-Control
 
	Areas of Application

The Sales Profile-R is specifically designed to help HR professionals make better decisions in recruitment. It primarily evaluates a person's Sales Potential, which refers to an individual's predisposition and motivation to be a successful sales person. Additionally, it provides information about an individual‟s strengths and weaknesses in sales and determines his/her selling style (combative, understanding clients‟s needs, etc). The Sales Profile-R can be used:

•	In the context of recruitment for a sales position
•	Throughout an employee's career
•	To identify training needs
•	For internal mobility
•	To conduct an audit of an organization's sales force
•	To identify sales potential in non-sales people (engineers, technicians, or others)

Table 1: Sales Profile- R Applications

Recruitment	Career Development	Team Audits and Personnel Evaluation
For pre-selection or selection purposes, when hiring a sales person	To analyze sales people's strengths and weaknesses, establish improvement goals, or identify training needs, in order to help them evolve within an
organization in sales	To identify a team's sales force, detect sales potential in people who do not hold a position in sales and optimize resources within an
organization

Complementary Function – Combination with other tests:

The Sales Profile-R can be combined with other personality questionnaires such as Central Test‟s Professional Profile or the CTPI-R in order to acquire a more precise and comprehensive profile of the individual.

For instance, combining the CTPI-R, which assesses work personality and managerial abilities, with the Sales Profile-R, can be useful in evaluating a person's potential as a Sales Director. Also, when combined with other personality tests, the Sales Profile-R can corroborate personality dimensions that could indicate an aptitude for sales, such as a high score on the “Persuasiveness” or “Firmness” factors from the Professional Profile.

Moreover, combining Sales Profile R with a personality test will give you more information about how the person will integrate into your company.
 
Table 2: Table of combinations - combining the Sales Profile-R with:


Secondary test	Purposes	Advantages

Professional Profile-R	-	Recruitment for a sales position
-	Audit	-	Go deeper into personality
-	Anticipate team integration

CTPI-R	-	Recruitment for a Sales director
-	Career evolution or promotion	-	Identify managerial style
-	Identify managerial potential
Occupational
Interest Inventory	Career management	Confirm interest in sales
Emotional Intelligence	-	Recruitment
-	Personal development	Identify or develop personal
and social skills to have a better performance in sales
Reasoning Test	Recruitment	Assess verbal abilities

1.2	Questionnaire Structure

•	Format:

The questionnaire is presented in a multiple choice format with 2 or 3 response options per question. The questions are situational and require the candidate to evaluate how he/she would react in a realistic sales context.

•	Questions:

The questionnaire is composed of 80 questions measuring 12 factors. Additionally, it has 3 social calibration questions. The 12 factors are grouped under 4 groups or dimensions. The questionnaire also includes a Social Desirability Scale and a Sales Potential Indicator. Social desirability scale items are integrated in the questionnaire along with other scale items.

Sample question:

The most effective way to convince my client to buy my software is:
-	to show him/her how it will increase his/her productivity
-	to give him/her a free trial offer
-	to give him/her a discount.

•	Languages:

The Sales Profile-R is available in English, French, Spanish, German Dutch, Brazilian and Arabic. For more information on availability in a particular language, please contact the Central Test customer service (consulting@centraltest.com).
 
1.3	Social Desirability

Social desirability is the tendency to present oneself in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others. As people are social by nature, they are generally inclined to seek some degree of social acceptance. Social desirability is one of the principle biases of personality tests, even more pertinent in the context of recruitment, as a candidate is usually tempted to answer in a way as to impress the recruiter.

The Sales Profile-R includes a Social Desirability Scale that is specifically designed to detect an individual‟s tendency to answer the questions so as to portray an overly positive image of himself/herself, and provides the test- administrator with an indication of this tendency by means of a score out of ten. However, scores obtained on this scale need to be carefully interpreted together with the overall score pattern on the test, as well as with other information concerning the person.

1.4	Requirement and Recommendations Concerning The Test-Taker
	Language, Education And Professional Experience
The Sales Profile–R is best suited for people with a mastery of the English language. Furthermore, the questions will be more accessible for people who hold at least a bachelor‟s degree.
The questions will be easier and more straightforward for people with experience in sales or people whose education is sales related


1.5	User Qualification And Recommendations

The questionnaire uses business vocabulary and is meant to be used by Human Resources, Training and Executive Development professionals and psychologists. Every person who uses the test has to follow a preliminary training. Additionally, before administering the test, the test administrator must be familiar with Central Test's conditions of use and code of ethics.

He/she must:

•	Ensure that the appropriate test has been chosen to meet the assessment needs.
•	Make sure that the test-taker is informed about the test and its purpose prior to taking it. This allows the test-taker to agree or refuse to take the test.
•	Provide feedback about the test results to the test-taker.
•	Delete test results and personal data about a candidate upon demand.
•	Ask the test-taker before transferring his/her personal data or test results to a third party

For more detailed information about Central Test's code of ethics, refer to Central Test's quality charter.
 
	Mode of Administration

The Sales Profile-R is designed to be administered online. However a PDF version of the questionnaire can also be made available for offline administration if conditions do not allow an online administration of the test. The reports can only be generated online; therefore, if the test has been administered offline, the test-administrator has to enter the candidate's responses in the online version of the questionnaire.

The Sales Profile-R can be administered from a distance and without supervision.

1.6	Cost, Conditions And Availability

The Sales Profile-R‟s cost, conditions and availability vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply:

•	The Sales Profile-R was created for the following users: HR professionals, training managers, Executive Development Professionals and psychologists. A preliminary training is compulsory. For more information on the training, please contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central Test's partners.
•	The Sales Profile-R can be ordered online after having followed the training, or by contacting one of Central Test's offices or one of Central Test's partners worldwide.
•	This manual is available and free to be downloaded for any Central Test registered user. The link is available from the documentation tab in your client account.

For information on the Sales Profile-R prices and related products and services, contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central test's partners.
 
2.	CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK AND DEVELOPMENT

	Chapter Summary

This chapter describes the initial conceptual framework of the Sales Profile-R and its development. The Sales Profile-R is a revised version of the Sales Profile. It was developed on the basis of empirical models to discern relevant personality and sales related dimensions.

2.1	The Test‟s Conceptual Framework

The first phase of development took place in 2006, starting with the study of the “commercial” profile.

To define the “commercial” profile, the following methods were employed:

•	A literature review identifying the personality variables related to job performance in sales.

The literature review revealed that some personality traits and personal characteristics correlate with better sales performance and productivity. For instance, interpersonal versatility (Michael, Archangel and Leimbach), dominance, empathetic listening skills and high achievement striving were all found to lead to better sales performance. Furthermore, successful sales individuals tend to be hard working, seek challenges, be intrinsically motivated and focused on customer satisfaction (CHR Administrator, 2005). The literature also demonstrates that successful sales people have a sense of opportunity when it comes to managing their relationships, are creative, good communicators, like social situations, have higher levels of aggression, and tend to be self-confident. (Miner, John B. 1962)

Studies examining the correlations between the Five Factor Model of personality and performance in sales positions have shown that individuals with higher levels of Extraversion and Conscientiousness and with lower levels of Neuroticism have a better sales performance (Furnham, Adrian, Fudge, Carl, 2008; Murray R. Barrick, Greg L. Stewart, Mike Piotrowski). Other studies have shown that emotional stability, Agreeableness, and the need for activity lead to more concern for customer satisfaction, and hence better customer service. (Tom J. Brown, John C. Mowen, D. Todd Donavan, Jane W. Licata (2002)).

This first step in defining what constitutes the “commercial profile” was crucial in understanding a sales person‟s typical behavioral style and skills, which yielded the definition of a certain number of dimensions found in the Sales Profile. For instance, the literature highlighted the importance for sales people to be sociable, good communicators and to have the ability to detect sales opportunities as well as to develop networks of influential people and decision- makers. This later evolved into the creation of the factors “business networking” and “charisma”.
 
Moreover, the literature pointed at empathy, listening skills and an overall preoccupation for customer satisfaction as being important for customer service, which helped shape the factor “Sense of service”.

•	Review Of Other Psychometric Tools Assessing Sales Performance

This review yielded the need for a more innovative form of questionnaire detaching itself from the classical personality questionnaire types and including questions related to more realistic settings. Hence the items were developed as scenarios close to commercial reality. The need to develop factors measuring acquired skills rather than personality traits also became apparent, which led to the development of factors such as “prospection” and “closing contracts”. Also, the need to measure not only dimensions to predict sales profile and potential, but also selling style. For instance strategic selling was found to determine an individual‟s preference for short or long term sales, and was added as one of the factors to be used to identify a person‟s selling style or preference.

•	Press Review Of Sales Jobs Detailing The “Commercial” Profile

A press review of the jobs detailing the required profile for sales positions helped confirm some of the dimensions already defined and made other dimensions become salient. From this analysis, the dimensions “Sales Acumen”, “Strategic Negotiation” and “Technical Expertise” were derived as a recurrent need from employers that had not yet been identified.

These different empirical analyses were used to identify the original 9 dimensions measured by the Sales Profile: Prospecting Clients, Sales Acumen, Closing Contracts, Business Networking, Strategic Negotiations, Charisma, Sense of Service, Self-Control, and Technical Expertise. 6 items were created per dimension.

•	Identifying the Sales potential

The Sales Profile-R was hence meant to measure acquired skills and knowledge as well as motivation for the field of sales. Out of all of the items, those that demonstrated most difference between sales and non-sales people were used to compute the Sales Potential Indicator. Therefore, it could be assumed that an individual with a high score on the Sales Potential Indicator would be more likely to be successful in sales, because his/her scores match the scores of experienced sales people.
 
2.2	Development Of The Test


A revised version of the Sales Profile, the Sales Profile-R, was launched in 2011. This revision was done in order to update the test and adapt it to the changes in the professional world as well as to bring the test closer to sales reality by creating more situational questions and thus evaluate sales potential in a more precise way.

Key facts about the development of the Sales Profile-R:

A literature review, including an investigation of different tools measuring sales potential, was conducted to analyze any changes in the literature that may have need attention. (Ambition, aggression, competition and self-motivation helped develop the factor combativeness).

•	The Sales Profile was administered to more than a thousand people whose data was compiled and analyzed to determine the dimensions that were most crucial in determining the commercial profile.
•	To create the Sales Profile-R questionnaire, only the best items from the Sales Profile were kept and new items were created. Notably, the Sales Profile-R includes a new dimension « Negotiation Skills » which includes the new factors “understanding needs”, “pitching” and “closing deals”.
•	The Sales Profile-R questionnaire puts greater emphasis on customer relations and on prospection. The factor “Technical expertise” was also removed from the new version of the test and replaced by “Strategic Selling”, which is more relevant to evaluate “business development skills”.
•	The Sales Profile-R also measures social desirability more closely with new items incorporated into the scenarios.
•	Results on the Sales Profile-R were analyzed with more than a thousand individuals to ensure that the changes and adaptations were relevant and statistically sound.
•	Generic items, unrelated to the business world, were also added in order to better assess personality variables related to sales potential. The final questionnaire consists of more questions and is closer to the commercial reality.
•	The Sales Profile-R was subjected to various statistical procedures, including factor analyses, t-tests and ANOVAs, to ensure that items clearly discriminate between sales and non-sales people.
•	Review of Central Test‟s personality tests to detect personality variables that could be useful in predicting sales performance. For example, “Extraversion”, “Persuasiveness” and “Firmness” were found to correspond to a typical “commercial” profile and were thus used as a base to create some of the Sales Profile-R dimensions (please refer to the Professional Profile manual).
	Reporting Results
 
The report includes:
•	Indicators:
o	Social Desirability Indicator (out of 10): This is measured with several items throughout the test, evaluating the tendency to respond so as to portray an overly positive image of oneself.
o	Sales Potential Indicator (out of 100): This allows you to quickly see whether a candidate has a predisposition for a successful career in sales. This indicator is calculated with the items that have been shown to best discriminate between sales and non-sales people. A score of 60 and above is considered to be indicative of a good salesperson.
•	Graph – A quick visual overview of the candidate's strengths and weaknesses.
•	Detailed results – Descriptions that detail the candidate‟s score on each dimension.
•	Personalized analysis of the report – A summary of the candidate's strengths, weaknesses and areas of development.
•	Matching the candidate's profile with positions of the company (to be configured).
•	Matching the candidate's profile with sales positions – To determine which sales positions best correspond to the candidate.
 
2.3	Description of Dimensions
The behavioural factors have been defined from a series of qualitative interviews with sales people and revised after several statistical studies. In the last version of the test (2011), 12 behavioural traits were retained and grouped under 4 groups or dimensions.



PROSPECTING

Definition	This factor measures the candidate's motivation and energy when
it comes to getting new customers, particularly by way of cold- calling.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores take initiative to break through barriers and get prospects interested. They do not hesitate to do
what it takes in order to get direct contact with potential clients.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores in this factor are more sedentary and
will be inclined to take approaches that do not involve direct prospection.

APPROACHING CLIENTS

Definition	This factor evaluates a person's natural disposition for approaching others face-to-face and captivating them, bringing them closer to a sale.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores are good at being entertaining and at grabbing and holding other people's attention. They can sense
when opportunities arise and this ability helps make interactions with clients run smoothly.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores in this factor will have trouble approaching prospects comfortably and spontaneously.

COMBATIVENESS
Definition	This factor measures how driven a sales person is to sell and how motivated he or she is to go beyond objectives.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores like competition and challenge and do not hesitate to maintain contact with prospects and clients.
They know how to bounce back after occasional failures and can take off again in their next mission to make more sales.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores in this factor are less inclined to be competitive and to go beyond themselves in a sales context.
 
 



NETWORKING
Definition	This factor evaluates how comfortably a candidate creates and maintains long-term, trusting relationships with clients.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores know how to form strong connections in order to build their networks and seize new opportunities. They
focus on connecting with directors and influential people, keeping business in mind.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores on this factor have more formal relations with clients.

STRATEGIC SELLING
Definition	This factor measures how much a candidate enjoys complex sales that can stretch over a period of several months.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores feel comfortable managing key accounts and implementing customised projects that involve
several people. They position themselves as the client's partner and take time to study problematic issues in detail.
(-)
Low score	A low-scoring candidate will naturally lean towards traditional and
direct sales. Candidates with low scores in this factor will more naturally move towards direct and traditional sales.


CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
Definition	This	factor	evaluates	the	candidate's	natural	disposition	for providing good customer service and keeping customers satisfied.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores retain clients, thanks to their sense of
service and dedication, not hesitating to take whatever time is necessary to deal with special requests.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores in this factor tend to focus less on customer relationship management and customer satisfaction, in order to invest time on other tasks.
 
 


UNDERSTANDING NEEDS
Definition	This factor evaluates a candidate's ability to identify the client's needs and criteria when the client makes a purchase.

(+)
High score	A high-scoring candidate will identify the right people to talk to and ask relevant questions in order to make the best possible offer. He or she can interpret different clues (information, objections, body language, and so on) and adapt a strategy
accordingly.
(-)
Low score	A low-scoring candidate will not spend time preparing for a negotiation	or	gathering	useful	information,	or	will	do	this
ineffectively.



PITCHING
Definition	Pitching is the ability to highlight the features of a product or service that meet the client's needs.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores are skillful speakers, are capable of dealing with objections and subtly positioning their offers by
tailoring their pitches to each client.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores in this factor find it hard to make their sales pitches successful during the negotiation phase.


CLOSING DEALS
Definition	“Closing deals” refers to the ability to lead a client to sign on the dotted line, while maintaining a good profit margin.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores know how to lead discussions towards
the term and conditions of a contract and they work on closing the sale in an optimal manner.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores will not naturally try to get contracts signed and they risk failing to move forward in negotiations.
 
 


SALES ACUMEN
Definition	This factor measures how much a candidate enjoys selling, negotiating, and making money.
(+)
High score	A high-scoring candidate approaches the selling process like a
game. Each step represents a win. Being spontaneous and daring, this person likes to persuade others and get good deals.
(-)
Low score	A low-scoring candidate will likely take a Cartesian approach to sales, considering sales to be more of a duty than a game.


CHARISMA
Definition	Charisma is the ability to make one's presence known and make one's voice heard.
(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores show self-assurance and have a certain charisma. Naturally, they are listened to and their viewpoints make an impact, which helps them during negotiations
when they are handled with tact.
(-)
Low score	Candidates with low scores in this factor do not seek to draw attention to themselves or they give their consent too easily.


SELF CONTROL
Definition	Self-control measures the ability to handle difficult situations.

(+)
High score	Candidates with high scores present themselves as calm and composed people, capable of controlling their emotions. They are enthusiastic despite any setbacks or events that are out of their control. They are good at remaining objective during stressful
situations.
(-)
Low score	Candidates scoring low on this factor are likely to be impulsive in
sales negotiations. They also tend to be impatient when a deal does not close as anticipated.
 
3.	PSYCHOMETRIC VALIDATION
The Sales Profile-R has been developed by psychologists and it meets the international requirements for scientific validation.
The last study was conducted between June 2014 and May 2015 with a sample size of 1698 people.


3.1	Validity:

Validity is the extent to which a test measures what it is supposed to measure and is a judgment made on the basis of observation and statistical indicators. It is important for a test to be reliable at first in order for it to be valid. Validity may be explored and determined through various means:

	Face validity refers to the operationalization of the concept. It is to see whether "on its face" the test items seem like a good translation of the construct. This is probably a basic way to try to demonstrate validity as it is highly subjective in nature. We need to rely on our subjective judgments for a number of practical purposes. To improve the quality of face validity assessment we made it more systematic and objective in nature by sending the test items to our panel of experts for their review and on basis of their feedback, only items showing consistent agreement were finally retained in the test.

	Content validity refers to the extent the contents of the test (factor descriptions and items) present true functionality of the construct. This is again done by the panel of the experts. The test indicates good level of content validity as most of its contents are aligned with that of the expert



3.2	Reliability

The reliability of a test refers to the precision of the scale scores, or the degree to which observed score variance reflects true score variance. In order to ensure that the items of the Sales Profile-R are homogeneous and measure the dimension they are meant to measure with precision, a reliability study was conducted.
 
Internal consistency

	Cronbach’s Alpha

Cronbach's Alpha is calculated for each one of the questionnaire's scales. It gives an estimate of the homogeneity and internal consistency of the questionnaire.

It is important to note that given the nature of this test and its structure, Cronbach's alpha is not a very pertinent or accurate measure of the test's stability for several reasons:

1-	First of all, the questions in this test consist of mini-scenarios which require the test taker to project himself/herself into different situations. This requires a wider variety and diversity of questions. More traditional self-evaluation questionnaires tend to consist of direct and repetitive questions such as “I like to be surrounded by people” to measure Extraversion, which leads to better homogeneity.

2-	The test dimensions are measured with very few items when compared to standard and traditional self-evaluation questionnaires that usually contain many more items per dimension (and much longer questionnaires as well).

Due to these two reasons, the Sales Profile R shows slightly weaker alphas than more traditional and direct self-evaluation questionnaires. However, it also provides a more precise assessment because the questions are more specific and realistic.

For a questionnaire evaluating sales potential, it is more interesting to concentrate on the test's ability to distinguish between potentially successful and unsuccessful sales people and to ensure that it has good predictive value and criterion validity.
 
Given below is a table showing the internal reliability of the 12 factors of the Sales Profile-R. The average reliability coefficient for the test is 0.34.




FACTORS	
RELIABILITY
Approaching clients	0.30
Combativeness	0.35
Prospecting	0.40
Networking	0.35
Customer satisfaction	0.33
Strategic selling	0.44
Pitching	0.14
Understanding needs	0.51
Closing deals	0.35
Charisma	0.26
Self-control	0.42
Sales acumen	0.25
 
Mean Scores (Gender-wise)
Given below is the comparison of mean scores of males and females on all Sales Profile-R factors. Minor differences exist in the mean scores of certain factors.


Gender	N
Males	1181
Females	517
Total	1698




Factors	Male
Mean Scores	Female
Mean Scores	Average
Mean Scores
Sales potential	50.4	50.5	50.49
Social desirability	2.6	2.6	2.6
Approaching clients	2.28	6.1	5.95
Combativeness	2.09	4.7	4.8
Prospecting	2.28	4.8	4.65
Networking	2.2	6.4	6.25
Customer
satisfaction	2.27	6.0	5.8
Strategic selling	2.43	5.2	5.15
Pitching	4.9	5.1	5
Understanding needs	7.1	7.5	7.3
Closing deals	4.8	4.5	4.65
Charisma	5.5	5.9	5.7
Self-control	7.1	7.1	7.1
Sales acumen	4.5	4.5	4.5


In order to show that the Sales Profile-R accurately differentiates between participants from Sales or Non-Sales background, t-values were computed. A t- value indicates the size of an effect. The further away from zero, the more likely that the effect is „statistically significant‟ (another way of saying that the effect is not likely due to random chance and that there is an underlying, repeatable cause).
 
The Table below, shows the Mean, Standard Deviation, t-values and Significance for Non-Sales and Sales groups on the 4 Dimensions and 12 Factors of the Sales Profile-R:



N= 700	Sales	Non-Sales	

t	

Sig

Factors	
Mean	
SD	
Mean	
SD		
Sales Potential	52.34	11.72	45.50	12.41	7.49	0.000
CLIENT ACQUISITION SKILLS	
5.39	
1.55	
4.80	
1.50	
5.04	
0.000
Approaching Clients	
5.99	
2.24	
5.36	
2.35	
3.62	
0.000
Combativeness	4.98	2.10	4.11	1.99	5.60	0.000
Prospecting	4.81	2.13	4.16	2.29	3.87	0.000
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT SKILLS	
5.91	
1.61	
5.38	
1.60	
4.39	
0.000
Networking	6.43	2.18	5.87	2.20	3.34	0.001
Client Satisfaction	5.94	2.28	5.54	2.30	2.34	0.020
Strategic Selling	5.26	2.43	4.71	2.48	2.97	0.003
NEGOTIATION SKILLS	
5.81	
1.49	
5.23	
1.34	
5.41	
0.000
Pitching	5.05	2.13	4.77	2.16	1.76	0.078
Understanding Needs	
7.44	
2.39	
6.65	
2.31	
4.42	
0.000
Closing Deals	4.80	2.13	4.22	2.09	3.68	0.000
SELLING SKILLS	5.85	1.40	5.49	1.44	3.34	0.001
Charisma	
5.75	
2.14	
5.23	
2.14	
3.23	
0.001
Self-Control	7.10	2.15	7.12	2.24	0.88	0.930
Sales Acumen	4.70	2.22	4.11	2.24	3.53	0.000
 
Table showing the average scores of sales persons based on experience on the Sales Potential, Factors, and Dimensions of the Sales Profile-R:



N= 1317	10 years and above	6-10
years	
3-5 years	less than 3 years
Factors				
Sales Potential	53.22	53.75	51.18	51.90
CLIENT ACQUISITION SKILLS	
5.42	
5.34	
5.16	
5.24
Approaching Clients	
6.41	
6.30	
6.13	
6.07
Combativeness	4.99	5.27	5.06	5.06
Prospecting	4.92	5.00	4.74	4.75
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT SKILLS	
5.97	
5.94	
5.54	
5.73
Networking	6.69	6.49	6.27	6.27
Client Satisfaction	5.74	6.07	5.73	5.74
Strategic Selling	5.48	5.24	5.19	5.19
NEGOTIATION SKILLS	6.12	5.93	5.69	5.74
Pitching	5.30	5.16	4.93	5.03
Understanding Needs	7.83	7.71	7.36	7.35
Closing Deals	5.24	4.93	4.85	4.86
SELLING SKILLS	5.69	6.03	5.67	5.81
Charisma	
5.72	
5.95	
5.71	
5.71
Self-Control	
6.81	
7.26	
7.07	
7.08
Sales Acumen	
4.55	
4.88	
4.65	
4.65
1.	Introduction

Wechsler describes intelligence as “the aggregate or global capacity of the individual to act purposefully, to think rationally and to deal effectively with his environment.” These three capacities are of extreme importance in a corporate environment where executives are expected to take stable and reasonable measures and to accommodate to frequent market changes. This test assesses the overall and specific intellectual capacities corporate persons across three areas, namely, verbal, logical, and numerical. It is deemed that these three areas are important as they encompass the entire subset of skills required in the corporate world such as communication, planning, organizing, calculating, and foreseeing outcomes.

Theoretical background

Intelligence is a multifaceted and multilayered concept. Among all the factors considered to make up one’s intelligence, researchers found three principle factors, namely, numerical, verbal and logical to be most predictive of one’s daily functioning. These three factor come from a global factor commonly referred to as General Intelligence or Spearman’s “g-factor”. The IQ (intelligence Quotient) obtained on any intelligence test is a numerical representation of this “g-factor”. It offers a global picture of an individual’s capacity to reason, plan, solve problems, think abstractly, comprehend complex ideas, learn quickly, learn from experience and adapt to most situations.

1.1	What the test measures ?

•	Verbal Intelligence

The verbal intelligence factor corresponds to the ability to understand language subtleties and to be at ease with verbal communications. Situations that draw on the verbal intelligence factor are numerous such as drafting reports or sales leaflets, speaking in public, playing word games, etc. The capacity to communicate and use language effectively is of the utmost importance for surviving as well as for thriving in today’s world.

•	Numerical Intelligence

The numerical factor of intelligence represents the ability to deal successfully and accurately with numbers. Real-life situations where numerical skills will be needed are varied such as in economics, finance, accounting, sales negotiations, quantitative data analysis, as well as doing mental calculations, etc.

•	Logical Intelligence

Every time a person discovers links between various elements, logical faculties are being utilized, which is the intellectual capacity most strongly related to general intelligence. In the professional world, numerous activities rely on a highly developed sense of logic such as in law, information technology, medicine, etc.
 
1.2	What the test taker/test administrator would get?

•	An	Intelligence	Quotient	(IQ)	indicating	the	candidate’s	intellectual capacity
•	A graphical representation of the candidate’s IQ and level of intelligence in reference to the population.
•	A general description	delineating the basics of intelligence and its relevance to this test.
•	A	graph	comparing	the	candidate’s	verbal,	logical,	and	numerical intellectual capacities
•	A detailed description of the implications of the candidates scores on various intellectual domains.
•	The candidate’s test profile with the appropriate solutions on the incorrect responses.

1.3	Application

42 questions in forced choice format, 35 minutes, online administration.

Recommended for assessing intellectual capacities such as reasoning, abstract thinking, analytical and critical thinking capacities of professionals such as sales persons, entrepreneurs, managers, and other office executives
 
2.	PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES

Periodic assessment of sensitivity and fine-tuning of a test are crucial to its long- term survival and effectiveness. The Reasoning Test has been subject to a series of validation studies since its first online publication in July, 2007. The latest validation study was conducted in the month of May, 2010.

2.1	Sample description

Analyses are done on a sample of 284 candidates who completed the test between January and May 2010. Tables below present sample characteristics (in %).

Gender	
Male	64%
Female	36%

Mean age is 31 years with a standard deviation of 9 years (min = 18 years; max
= 63 years)

Age	
18 – 25 years	35%
26 – 30 years	25%
31 – 40 years	23%
41 – 63 years	17%


Education level	
MBA/Business School/Engineering School	37%
University Degree	48%
Diploma / Vocational training	15%


Place	
Europe	39%	
North America	8%	
Africa	6%	
Asia	45%	
Oceania	2%	
Other	16%	
 
2.2	Descriptive statistics
Means and Standard deviations

Factor	Mean	Standard deviation		Min	Max
Logical reasoning	4.65	1.72	0.10	0	10
Numerical reasoning	5	2.32	0.14	0	10
Verbal reasoning	4.32	1.89	0.11	0	8.67

# Mean and standard deviation together provide the estimate of candidate’s position in the population of reference.

Mean score is normally a mathematical average of all the observed scores. It provides a tentative assessment as to what extent the data is representative of the theoretical assumptions. Mathematically it tells as to which point on the scale most of the scores are falling around. In this test all the factors are scored on a 10 point scale ranging from 0 to 10. Ideally, the mean score should fall between
4.5 and 5.5. From the above tabulated scores mean scores are falling in the ideal score range but for verbal reasoning which is slightly below ideal score range.

# Standard deviation is the mathematical average of all the individual deviation scores. It provides information as to what extent the scores are dispersed from the mean score. A high score indicates too much of dispersion and low score indicates too little.

For a scale of 10 points a standard deviation between 1.5 and 2.0 is good assuming that the characteristic measured by the scale is normally distributed in the population. Standard deviation for numerical reasoning is a bit above that range, scores are more spread around the mean than for the other factors.

From the assessment point of view the test reasoning test provides correct evidence that it is corresponding with the theoretical background. It can be taken into consideration since every measurement contains some error.
 
2.3	Validity
Validity is the extent to which a test measures what it is supposed to measure and is a subjective judgment made on the basis of experience and empirical indicators. The validity of this test was assessed using two methods:

•	Construct Validity: If a test has construct validity, it implies that it measures the domain that it seeks to measure. In order to establish construct validity, the domain that seeks to be measured needs to be carefully defined, and then items that are relevant to that domain require be carefully choosing, incorporating, and their relevance evaluated.
The items on this test were chosen by a team of psychologists, senior corporate executives, university academicians, statisticians and other relevant personnel after numerous consultations. These items are continuously reevaluated and updated depending on relevant statistical data.

•	Criterion Validity: Criterion validity is used to demonstrate the accuracy of a measure or procedure by comparing it with another measure (criterion) which has been demonstrated to be valid. Depending on the time positioning of the criterion, there are two types of criterion validity- concurrent validity and predictive validity.

•	Concurrent Validity occurs when the criterion measures are obtained at the same time as the test scores. This indicates the extent to which the test scores accurately estimate an individual’s current state with regards to the criterion. For example, on the Corporate IQ Test, concurrent validity is established by comparing candidates’ scores to their current functioning within companies and/or to their academic performance, as it is deemed appropriate. It is expected that candidates with higher IQ scores perform well on company tasks and academic endeavors. This was found to be true during recurrent validation studies, thus establishing the criterion/concurrent validity of the test.
 
2.4	Socio-cultural considerations
The test was also examined against some socio-cultural considerations like gender, Region, educational background and age. These findings provide a good estimate of sensitivity of the test. With an objective of examining the socio- cultural influences on the scores of the Reasoning Test, a comparative statistical analysis was conducted. Comparing test scores among different socio-cultural groups serve two purposes:

A.	It provides a way to assess validity of an instrument (test, inventory, and profile). An instrument is valid if it is able to identify the difference between two groups as per the concept i.e. if it is established that men in general have good numerical ability than women then a test of numerical ability must yield a higher mean score for men as compared to women.

B.	It provides an insight into interpretation of scores when two people belonging two different socio-cultural groups obtain same score on one or more factors of the test.
The candidates were classified according to their geographical origin, Educational background, Age and gender. For the sake of simplicity certain regions were grouped together and assigned a code. Likewise age and study levels were also grouped together. Please refer to the tables below :

2.4.1	Gender differences


Factor	Male	Female
Logical reasoning	4.62	4.69
Numerical reasoning	5.17	4.71
Verbal reasoning	4.34	4.26

No significant difference is observed between male and female in the intelligence test. However, the test seems to confirm the popular belief that males, in general, are a little higher on numerical intelligence.
 
2.4.2	Age effect


Factor	Logical reasoning	Numerical reasoning	Verbal reasoning
Correlation	-0.14	-0.05	0.11

There is no significant correlation between the age of the respondents and their scores on the factors. It indicates that the Verbal intelligence, numerical intelligence and logical intelligence doesn’t alter with age.

2.4.3	Education level differences

Factor	MBA	University	Diploma
Logical reasoning	4.61	4.23	4.73
Numerical reasoning	5.03	4.40	5.17
Verbal reasoning	4.23	4.15	4.80

In red the significative correlations p<0.05
Independent sample T-Test was carried out to examine if reasoning capacity of a person is influenced by formal education. No significant differences are observed.

2.4.4	Geographical differences

Factor	Europe	Asia	Other
Logical reasoning	4.59	3.78	3.84
Numerical reasoning	5.05	4.26	3.85
Verbal reasoning	5.10	3.04	3.67

Independent sample T-Test was carried out to examine if Region has any influence on reasoning capacity of a person. There is significant correlation in the reasoning capacity across region, people from group “Other” show lower numerical and verbal reasoning capacity than other regions. People from Asia have lower verbal ability than Europe. Cultural, Environmental and Ethical factors affect reasoning capacity of people. There are lots of evidences from past studies which prove the same.
 
2.4.5	Sociological calibration Legend













For Europe

Class	Logical Reasoning	Numerical Reasoning	Verbal Reasoning
20	0 - 3	0 - 3	0 – 3.5
40	3.1 – 4	3.1 – 4	3.6 – 5
60	4.1 - 4.5	4.1 – 5.5	5.1 – 5.5
80	4.6 – 5.5	5.6 – 7	5.6 – 6
100	> 5.6	> 7.1	> 6.1
 
For Asia

Class	Logical Reasoning	Numerical Reasoning	Verbal Reasoning
20	0 – 2.5	0 – 2.5	0 - 2
40	2.6 – 4	2.6 – 3.5	2.1 – 2.5
60	4.1 – 4.5	3.6 – 5.00	2.6 – 4
80	4.6 – 5.5	5.1 – 6.5	4.1 – 4.5
100	> 5.6	> 6.6	> 4.6

For Other Countries

Class	Logical Reasoning	Numerical Reasoning	Verbal Reasoning
20	0 - 2	0 – 1.5	0 - 1
40	2.1 – 25	1.6 – 2.5	1.1 – 2.5
60	2.6 – 3.5	2.6 – 3.5	2.6 – 4
80	3.6 – 5	3.6 – 5.00	4.1 – 5
100	> 5.1	> 5.1	> 5.1

ТАЙЛАН
Ажилтны хандлага,
ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ








 













АГУУЛГА
1.	ГРАФИК
2.	УРВУУ ГРАФИК
3.	ХУВЬ ХҮНИЙ ОНЦЛОГ ШИНЖ ЧАНАР
4.	ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ХҮСНЭГТ
5.	ТАЙЛБАРУУД
6.	ЕРӨНХИЙ ҮНЭЛГЭЭ
7.	УР ЧАДВАРУУД
8.	АЖИЛ МЭРГЭЖЛҮҮДЭД НИЙЦТЭЙ БАЙДАЛ


















Central Test-ийн тусгайлан боловсруулсан Ажилтны хандлага, ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ болон Central Test-ийн лого нь ОУ-ын оюуны өмчийн эрхээр хамгаалагдсан болно. Тиймээс Central Test бичгээр зөвшөөрөл олгоогүй тохиолдолд тус үнэлгээг хуулбарлах, өөрчлөх, засварлахыг хориглоно.

Central Test - Empowering Talent © 2024 Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.
 

1	- ҮНДСЭН ГРАФИК
Бусдыгнэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг (1.9)
Бие дааж, ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай
(3.8)
Амжилтанд
хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй
(8.1)
Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай (1.3)
Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч
(5.6)
Ятган
нөлөөлдөг(6.3)	Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан
ханддаг(6.3)
 





Нээлттэй харилцдаг(3.1)
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг(5)
Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг(1.3)
Баримтад тулгуурладаг(10)
Удирдан чиглүүлэх
дуртай(7.5)		Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг (5.6)
Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг(8.1

  СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭХ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛС БА ҮНЭ ЦЭНЭ	  ЗАН ТӨЛӨВ БА ХУВИЙН ОНЦЛОГ ШИНЖ

2	- УРВУУ ГРАФИК
Уламжлалыг дагах дуртай (4.4)
Санаагаа шулуухан
илэрхийлдэг(3.7)	Өөрийн үзэл
бодолд хатуу тууштай(3.7)
Өөрийн асуудлаа тэргүүнд тавьдаг
(8.1)
Багаар ажиллах дуртай (6.2)
Байгаа зүйлдээ талархдаг(1.9)





Нухацтай төлөвлөх дуртай
(8.7)
Нээлттэй бус(6.9)
Сэтгэл хөдлөлтэй(5)
Хувийн зохион байгуулалттай(8.7)
Зөн совин, мэдрэмжид тулгуурладаг(0)
Заавар, зөвлөгөөнд дуртай (2.5)
Ажил амьдралыг тэнцвэртэй байлгах дуртай(4.4)
Дүрэм журамд баригдах дургүй(1.9)
 
СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭХ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛС БА ҮНЭ ЦЭНЭ	  ЗАН ТӨЛӨВ БА ХУВИЙН ОНЦЛОГ ШИНЖ
 

3	- АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХЬ ХУВЬ ХҮНИЙ ОНЦЛОГ, ЗАН ТӨЛӨВИЙН ДҮН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ

Энэ хэсгээс таны үзүүлэлтийн онцлог шинж бүхий зан чанарын талаар мэдэх болно. Үр дүнг хөрвүүлэхэд анхаарах санамж:
-	Зарим нэг зан чанар өөр хоорондоо зөрчилдөж болох ба энэ нь хүний зан чанарын онцлог юм.
-	Хувийн зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийг илүү дэлгэрэнгүйгээр “Тодорхойлолт” хэсгээс харна уу.

Давуу тал





Хөгжүүлбэл зохих чадварууд
4	- ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ХҮСНЭГТ
Дараах хүснэгтэд тухайн хүнтэй холбоотой асуулгаас гарсан үр дүнг нэгтгэн үзүүллээ. Баруун талын баганад үндсэн хүчин зүйлийг, зүүн талд эсрэг хүчин зүйлийг харуулсан. “ ✔ ” нь тухайн хүнд өгсөн оноог илэрхийлнэ.“ ✔ ” баруун талын баганад ойр байх тусмаа үндсэн хүчин зүйлтэй төдий чинээ хүчтэй, эсрэгээрээ зүүн талын багана руу дөхөх тутам эсрэг хүчин зүйлээс хүчтэй хамаарах хандлагатай болохыг илтгэнэ.

Эсрэг хүчин зүйл	A	B	C	D	E	F	G
H	I	J	K	Үндсэн хүчин зүйл
ЗАН ТӨЛӨВ БА ХУВИЙН ОНЦЛОГ ШИНЖ
Санаагаа шулуухан илэрхийлдэг
Шударга, шулуухан, ил тод								
 				Ятган нөлөөлдөг
/Итгүүлэх, нөлөөлөх чадвартай,
стратегич/
Өөрийн үзэл бодолд хатуу тууштай
Шийдэмгий, зоримог, эрч хүчтэй								
 				Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг
/Зохицомтгой, зөвшилцөлд хүрэхийг эрмэлздэг, аливаад нээлттэй/
Нээлттэй бус
Өөрийгөө нөөсөн, дуу багатай, албархуу				
 								Нээлттэй харилцдаг
Нөхөрсөг, нийтэч, олон талт
Сэтгэл хөдлөлтэй
Оргилуун, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэмтгий, хариу үйлдэл хурдан үзүүлдэг					
 						Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг
Тайван аядуу, өөрийгөө хянах, биеэ
барих чадвартай
Хувийн зохион байгуулалттай
Системтэй, зарчимч, төлөвлөлттэй		
 										Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг
Зөнгөөрөө, дасамтгай, тодорхойгүй зүйлд тааламжтай ханддаг
Зөн совин, мэдрэмжид тулгуурладаг Мэдрэмж зөн совинтой, цаад мөн чанарыг ойлгохыг хичээдэг											
 	Баримтад тулгуурладаг Логик үндэслэлтэй, учир зүйн авцалдаатай, аналитик
Дүрэм журамд баригдах дургүй
Өөрийнхөө стандартыг бий болгодог, дүрэм журам үл дагагч										
 		Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг
Стандартад зохицомтгой, дүрэм
журмыг хүндэтгэдэг
СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭХ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛС БА ҮНЭ ЦЭНЭ
Ажил амьдралыг тэнцвэртэй байлгах дуртай
Ажил, амьдралын тэнцвэрийг чухалчилдаг, илүү цагаар ажилладаггүй							

 					Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг Ажилдаа бүхнээ зориулсан, ажлын төлөө төрсөн, ажилдаа махруу
Заавар, зөвлөгөөнд дуртай
Seeks guidance and advice, Appreciates being directed									
 			Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай
Үүрэг хариуцлага хүлээх чадвартай, захиргаадагч, хариуцлагатай
Нухацтай төлөвлөх дуртай
Тэвчээртэй, аливааг тусгаж, хүлээж авдаг, нарийвчлан бодох дуртай		
 										Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай
Эрч хүчтэй, эрсдэл хүлээх чадвартай,
шуурхай
Байгаа зүйлдээ талархдаг
Сэтгэл ханасан, дөлгөөн, хашир										

 		Амжилтанд хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй Өрсөлдөх чадвартай, амжилтаа жолоодогч, ололт, амжилтанд
хүрэхийг тэмүүлдэг
Багаар ажиллах дуртай
Хамтач, хүмүүстэй нийцтэй, багаар ажиллах чадвартай				
 								Бие дааж, ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай
Бие даасан, бусдаас хамааралгүй ажиллахыг илүүд үздэг
Өөрийн асуудлаа тэргүүнд тавьдаг Хувийн сонирхлоо тэргүүнд тавьдаг, өрсөлдөөнч		
 										Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг Бие даасан, бусдаас хамааралгүй ажиллахыг илүүд үздэг
Уламжлалыг дагах дуртай
Тогтсон дүрэм журам, нэгэнт бий болсон аргад дуртай, хуучинсаг							
 					Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч
Сониуч, уран сэтгэмжтэй, шинийг
туршигч
 
5	- ТАЙЛБАР

Зан төлөв ба Зан чанар
Санаагаа шулуухан илэрхийлдэг	Ятган нөлөөлдөг



Тодорхойлолт
“Ятган нөлөөлдөг” гэдэг нь хүмүүстэй харилцах үедээ тодорхой арга барил ашиглан тэднийг ятгах, нөлөөлөхдөө сайн байх чадварыг хэлнэ. “Санаагаа шулуухан илэрхийлдэг” гэдэг нь харилцаанд бодитой, шударга, ил тод байх чадварыг хэлнэ.

Өөрийн үзэл бодолд хатуу тууштай	Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг” нь зөрчлөөс зайлсхийн, зөвшилцөлд хүрэхийн тулд бусадтай харилцахдаа буулт хийхэд нээлттэй бэлэн байх чадвар гэж тодорхойлсон бол “Өөрийн үзэл бодолд хатуу тууштай” гэдэг нь өөрийн үзэл бодлыг хамгаалах, бусадтай үзэл бодлоо солилцох үедээ тууштай байдлаа хадгалах хандлагыг илэрхийлж байгаа юм.
 

Сэтгэл хөдлөлтэй	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг” гэдэг нь стресстэй нөхцөл байдал эсвэл зохицуулах боломжгүй нөхцөл байдалтай тулгарсан үедээ тайван байх, биеэ барих хандлага юм. Харин “Сэтгэл хөдлөлтэй” гэдэг нь стресстэй үедээ ил тодоор элдэв үйлдэл үзүүлэх, аливаа зүйлд мэдрэмжээрээ хандах, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө шууд илэрхийлэх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ.

Нээлттэй бус	Нээлттэй харилцдаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Нээлттэй харилцдаг” гэдэг нь идэвхтэй, найрсаг харилцааг хөгжүүлэх оролдлого их хийдэг хандлага бол “Нээлттэй бус” гэдэг нь хянамгай, ихэвчлэн албан ёсны цөөн тооны ойр дотно харилцаа тогтоохыг сонгох хандлага юм.
 

Хувийн зохион байгуулалттай	Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг” гэдэг нь тодорхой төлөвлөгөөгүйгээр ажлыг гүйцэтгэх, зөнгөөрөө байх, урьдчилан таамаглаагүй нөхцөл байдалд амархан зохицох чадварыг илэрхийлдэг бол “Хувийн зохион байгуулалттай” гэдэг нь аливаа зүйлийг зохион байгуулалттай, системтэй, заавар журмын дагуу гүйцэтгэх хандлага юм.

Зөн совин, мэдрэмжид тулгуурладаг	Баримтад тулгуурладаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Баримтад тулгуурладаг” гэдэг нь мэдээллийг үнэлэх, шийдвэр гаргахдаа объектив байдлаар, логиктой, задлан шинжилж, үндэслэлтэйгээр хандах хандлага бол “Зөн совин, мэдрэмжид тулгуурладаг” гэдэг нь өөрийн хувийн үзэл бодол, дотоод мэдрэмж, зөн совин, сэтгэгдэлд тулгуурлан нөхцөл байдлыг үнэлж, сонголтоо хийх хандлага юм.
 

Дүрэм журамд баригдах дургүй	Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг” гэдэг нь байгууллага болон нийгмийн томъёолон гаргасан удирдамж, стандартыг баримталж, хүндлэх хандлагыг илэрхийлдэг бол “Дүрэм журамд баригдах дургүй” нь одоо байгаа дүрэм журмыг үр дүнгүй, амьдралд нийцэхгүй байна гэж үзвэл дүрмийг шинээр томъёолох эсвэл өөрчлөх санаачлагатай байх хандлага юм.
 

СЭДЭЛ БА ҮНЭ ЦЭНЭ
Ажил амьдралыг тэнцвэртэй байлгах дуртай	Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг



Тодорхойлолт
“Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг” гэдэг нь ажилдаа ач холбогдол өгч, сэтгэл зүрхээ байгууллагатайгаа холбосон хандлагыг илэрхийлдэг бол “Ажил амьдралыг тэнцвэртэй байлгах дуртай” гэдэг нь хувийн амьдрал ажил хоёроо зааглан хоёуланг нь тэнцвэртэй байлгаж чадах хандлага юм.
 

Заавар, зөвлөгөөнд дуртай	Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай



Тодорхойлолт
“Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай” гэдэг нь нөхцөл байдлыг гартаа авах, манлайлах ур чадварыг шаарддаг ажил үүргийг хийх хүсэл гэж тодорхойлогддог бол “Заавар, зөвлөгөөнд дуртай” гэдэг нь удирдуулж, тогтмол хариу авах, түүнчлэн тодорхой заасан удирдамжийн дагуу ажиллахыг илүүд үзэх явдал юм.

Нухацтай төлөвлөх дуртай	Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай



Тодорхойлолт
“Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай” нь хурдан хугацаанд үр дүнг нь бүрэн харах боломжтой богино хугацааны төслүүдийг илүүд үзэж, эрч хүчтэй байх хандлагыг тодорхойлдог бол “Нухацтай төлөвлөх дуртай” гэдэг нь ирээдүйд үр дүн нь гарах, илүү стратеги төлөвлөлт, тэвчээр болон эргэцүүлэн бодох, сэтгэх чадвар шаардсан удаан хугацааны цогц төслийг илүүд үзэх хандлага юм.
 

Байгаа зүйлдээ талархдаг	Амжилтанд хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй



Тодорхойлолт
“Амжилтанд хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй” гэдэг нь өндөр, эрсдэлтэй зорилго тавьж амжилт, ололтын төлөө өрсөлдөх хүчтэй хүсэл гэж тодорхойлогддог бол “Байгаа зүйлдээ талархдаг” нь өөрийн байр сууриндаа сэтгэл хангалуун, мэргэжлийн тогтвортой байдалдаа тааламжтай байх хандлага юм.

Багаар ажиллах дуртай	Бие дааж, ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай



Тодорхойлолт
“Бие дааж, ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай” гэдэг нь бие даан, эрх чөлөөтэйгөөр ажиллах хүслийг илэрхийлдэг бол “Багаар ажиллах дуртай” бүлгээрээ ажиллах, хамтран ажиллахдаа дуртай, багийн харилцан хамаарал дээр анхаарал хандуулах хандлагыг хэлнэ.
 

Өөрийн асуудлаа тэргүүнд тавьдаг	Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг


Тодорхойлолт
“Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг” гэдэг нь өөрийн цаг зав, нөөц боломжоо бусдын төлөө зориулж, тэдний сайн сайхны төлөө хувь нэмрээ оруулахыг хүсэхийг хэлж байгаа бол “Өөрийн асуудлаа тэргүүнд тавьдаг” гэдэг нь хувийн зорилгодоо илүү анхаарах байдлаар бодит байдлыг илүүд үзэх хандлага юм.

Уламжлалыг дагах дуртай	Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч



Тодорхойлолт
“Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч” гэдэг нь аливаа зүйлийг судлах, шинэ арга барилыг турших дуртай, сониуч занг илэрхийлдэг бол “Уламжлалыг дагах дуртай” нь туршилтын хандлагаас илүүтэйгээр хүмүүсийн хэрэглэж дадсан батлагдсан арга барилыг ашиглахад тааламжтай байх хандлага юм.
 
6	- ЕРӨНХИЙ ҮНЭЛГЭЭ

Энэ хэсэгт горилогчийн үзүүлэлтийг ажиллах хувийн онцлог чанартай тааруулж шинжилнэ. Хамгийн сайн зохицол 100% болно.
Ажиллах хэв маяг
1	Хянуур, нягт нямбай	93%
2	Бодлоготой хүлээцтэй	74%
3	Шийдэмгий, нөлөөлөгч	67%
4	Бие дааж ганцаараа ажилладаг	62%
5	Нийгмийн	57%
6	Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг	55%
7	Багаар ажилладаг	46%
8	Эрч хүчтэй, идэвхтэй	44%
9	Зөн совин, мэдрэмжтэй	15%

Хянуур, нягт нямбай

Хянуур, нягт нямбай хүмүүс төрөлхөөсөө нямбай байдаг. Тэд ажлын арга барилаа тодорхойлж, дүрэм журмыг баримталдаг ба учир нь тэд дүрэм журам нь тэдний ажлын чанарт хувь нэмрээ оруулдаг гэдэгт итгэдэг. Тэд өөрсдийн үр дүнтэй гэж үздэг уламжлалт, сайн тодорхойлогдсон арга барилыг ашиглахыг илүүд үздэг.
Түүнчлэн тэд хэсэг бүрийг нягтлан ажиглаж, шийдвэр гаргахдаа баримтад тулгуурладаг.

Бодлоготой хүлээцтэй

Бодлоготой хүлээцтэй хүмүүс, тэвчээр хатуужил, тэнцвэртэй байдлаараа онцлог. Тэд ихэнхдээ тайван, боломжит бүхий л үр дагаврыг шалгасны дараа шийдвэрт хүрдэг. Улмаар тэд хянамгай, хүлээцтэй гэдэг нь харагддаг. Тэд тухайлсан чиглэлд анхаарал хандуулж, бодол эргэцүүлэлд амархан төвлөрч чаддаг байна.

Шийдэмгий, нөлөөлөгч

Шийдэмгий, нөлөөлөгч хүмүүс маш хүчтэй хэлэлцээр хийх чадвартай байдаг. Тэд шаргуу бөгөөд бусдыг чадварлагаар шийдэмгийгээр ятгах чадвартай байдаг. Тэд хэлэлцүүлгийн үед өөрсдийн давуу тал болгон ажиллах бүрэн эрхийг авах энергийн хүчийг биедээ агуулж байдаг. Тэд нөхцөл байдлыг гартаа авч өөрсдийн хэрэгцээнд нийцүүлэн нягталдаг.
 

Бие дааж ганцаараа ажилладаг

Бие дааж ганцаараа ажилладаг хүмүүс, өөртөө засаг тогтоох, өөрийн хүчинд итгэх хэрэгцээгээр ялгагддаг. Тэд хяналтгүйгээр ажиллаж, ганцаараа ажиллахдаа тааламжтай байдаг. Мөн тэд хатуу чанга дүрэм журам эсвэл нарийн аргачлалд баригдалгүй тодорхой хэмжээний эрх чөлөөтэй ажиллах дуртай. Тэд нөхөрсөг нээлттэй
байхаас илүү өөрт төвлөрсөн байдалтайгаар багаар ажиллахаас илүүтэйгээр бие даан ажиллахыг илүүд үзэх хандлагатай.

Нийгмийн

Нийтэч хамтач хүмүүс төрөлхийн харилцаа сайтай, бүлэгт хамаарагдах хэрэгцээ шаардлагаа мэдэрч байдаг. Тэд танилын хүрээгээ тэлж, бусадтай хувийн болон ажлын харилцаа амархан тогтоодог. Тэд багаар ажиллахдаа тааламжтай, багийн гишүүдэд урам зориг өгөх хандлагатай байдаг. Улмаар тэд янз бүрийн багийг хялбархан нэгтгэх чадвартай байдаг.

Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг

Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг хүмүүс ажилдаа өөрсдийгөө зориулж, сэтгэл санааны хувьд ажил болон
байгууллагатайгаа холбогдсон байдаг. Тэд хүсэл тэмүүлэлд автсан, ажлынхаа талаарх мэдрэмжээ илэрхийлдэг, ажлаа гүйцэтгэхэд өөр ямар нэг гадаад сэдэл шаардлагагүй байдаг. Тэд заримдаа стресстэй нөхцөл байдалд сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянаж чаддаггүй байх магадлалтай.

Багаар ажилладаг

Багаар ажилладаг хүмүүс харилцан тохиролцох хандлагаар онцлогтой байдаг. Тэд хэлэлцүүлгийн үед нийцэх шалтгаан олох, хамтран ажиллаж буй хүмүүсийнхээ хэрэгцээг ойлгох байдлаар үл зөвшилцөлд шийдэл олохоор ажиллах хэрэгтэй гэдгийг мэдэрсэн байдаг. Тэд энэрэнгүй бөгөөд заримдаа өөрсдийнх нь хэрэгцээг ч үл хүндэтгэж буй бусад хүмүүст туслахдаа баяртай байдаг.

Эрч хүчтэй, идэвхтэй

Эрч хүчтэй, идэвхтэй хүмүүс ажилдаа урам зоригтой ханддаг хандлагаараа ялгардаг. Тэд эрч хүчтэй, маш их идэвх зоригоор ажилладаг. Тэд хурдан хугацаанд үр дүнг хүртэх, хийсвэрлэхээс илүү амьдралд хэрэгжих боломжтой зүйлд дуртай. Тэд амжилтаар хөтлөгддөг ба зогсонги байдал мэдэрвэл янз бүрийн адал явдал хайж өөрийн ажлыг өвөрмөц болгохдоо дуртай.

Зөн совин, мэдрэмжтэй

Зөн совин, мэдрэмжтэй хүмүүс дотоод мэдрэмждээ найддаг, тодорхойгүй нөхцөл байдлыг амархан зохицуулах чадвартай байдаг. Тэд уян хатан хандлагатай бөгөөд шинэлэг зүйлд нээлттэй, бүх зүйлийг оновчтой байлгах гэж хичээдэггүй. Тэд төрөлхийн бүтээлч бөгөөд тогтсон журамд баригдахгүйгээр аливаа зүйлийг судалж шинжилдэг. Тэд бодит баримт эсвэл хэсгүүдэд анхаарал хандуулахын оронд үйл явдлаас төрөх сэтгэгдлийг анхаарч, ач холбогдол өгөх хандлагатай байдаг.
 
Юнайтед Карьер Консалтинг ХХК	  Ажилтны хандлага, ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ
7	- УР ЧАДВАРУУД

Энэ хэсэгт зан авиртай холбоотой чадвар, хандлагыг агуулдаг гол чадамжуудыг шинжлэн судална. Хамгийн сайн тохиромж нь 100% -тай байна.
АНАЛИЗ, ДҮН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ ХИЙХ ЧАДВАРУУД


1	Анализ хийх чадвар	100%

2	Аливааг хурдан сурах чадвар	80%

3	Мэдлэг, туршлага хуримтлуулах чадвар	78%

4	Шийдвэр гаргах чадвар	75%

5	Бодолтой байх чадвар	72%

6	Мэдлэг туршлагаа хуваалцах чадвар	45%


БОРЛУУЛАЛТЫН УР ЧАДВАРУУД

1	Стратеги борлуулалт хийх чадвар	87%
2	Хэрэглэгчийн сэтгэл хөдлөл мэдрэмжийг нэн тэргүүнд тавих чадвар	52%
3	Хэлцэл тохиролцоог амжилттай дуусгах чадвар	49%
4	Үр дүнг төсөөлүүлэн тайлбарлах чадвар	46%
5	Хэрэглэгчийг сэтгэл ханамжтай байлгах чадвар	45%
6	Бизнесийн боломжийг тодорхойлох чадвар	44%
7	Хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээг ойлгох чадвар	41%
8	Шинэ хэрэглэгч олох чадвар	38%
9	Борлуулалт хийх чадвар	28%
10	Хүмүүсийг холбох, танилын хүрээгээ тэлэх чадвар	22%
 

ХАРИЛЦААНЫ УР ЧАДВАРУУД


1	Илтгэх чадвар	100%

2	Бусдад нөлөөлөх чадвар	58%

3	Бусдад хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх чадвар	55%

4	Стратегитай харилцах чадвар	55%

5	Тохиролцол, хэлцэл хийх чадвар	48%

6	Бусдыг татах чадвар	43%

7	Сонсох чадвар	27%


Менежментийн ур чадварууд


1	Үүрэг даалгаврыг оновчтой хуваарилах чадвар	93%

2	Гүйцэтгэлийг удирдах чадвар	90%

3	Өөртөө итгэлтэй, шийдэмгий удирдах чадвар	65%

4	Манлайлах чадвар	64%

5	Өөрчлөлтийг дэмжих чадвар	56%

6	Менторлох чадвар	53%


СТРАТЕГИТАЙГААР АЖЛАА ТӨЛӨВЛӨЖ, ҮНЭЛЭХ УР ЧАДВАРУУД


1	Цагийн менежмент	100%

2	Эрсдэлийг удирдах чадвар	100%

3	Стратеги борлуулалт хийх чадвар	100%

4	Зохион байгуулах чадвар	100%

5	Төслийг удирдах чадвар	90%

6	Олон үүрэг даалгаврыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх чадвар	71%

7	Хямралыг удирдах чадвар	40%

8	Бүтээлч, шинэлэг сэтгэлгээтэй байх чадвар	35%

9	Далайцтай сэтгэх чадвар	33%

 

ХАРИЛЦАА ХОЛБОО ТОГТООЖ, УДИРДАХ УР ЧАДВАРУУД


1	Багийг идэвхижүүлэх чадвар	57%

2	Багийн уур амьсгалыг бүрдүүлэх чадвар	54%

3	Маргааныг шийдвэрлэх чадвар	48%

4	Харилцаа тогтоох чадвар	26%

5	Бусдыг ойлгох чадвар	24%


ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ ТАНЬЖ МЭДЭХ, УДИРДАХ УР ЧАДВАРУУД


1	Дүрэм журам зааварчилгааг баримтлах чадвар	70%

2	Өөрийгөө бодитоор үнэлэх чадвар	66%

3	Стрессээ удирдах чадвар	37%

4	Өөрчлөлтөд хурдан зохицох чадвар	11%


БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ҮНЭТ ЗҮЙЛ, СОЁЛ, ЭЕРЭГ УУР АМЬСГАЛЫГ БҮРДҮҮЛЭХ УР ЧАДВАРУУД

1	Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах чадвар	82%
2	Мэдээллийн нууцыг хадгалах чадвар	78%
3	Зорилтод шалгуурын дагуу шударга шийдвэр гаргах чадвар	53%
4	Бусдын соёл, ялгаатай байдлыг ойлгох чадвар	40%
5	Бусдыг хүндэтгэх чадвар	24%
 

АЖИЛДАА ХАНДАХ ХАНДЛАГА, ОРОЛЦООГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ УР ЧАДВАРУУД


1	Чанарыг эрхэмлэдэг	87%

2	Хичээл зүтгэл гаргах чадвар	75%

3	Хариуцлага хүлээх чадвар	70%

4	Идэвхи, оролцоотой байх чадвар	61%

5	Санаачлагатай байх чадвар	26%

6	Туслахад хэзээд бэлэн байх чадвар	14%

 
8	- АЖИЛ МЭРГЭЖЛҮҮДЭД НИЙЦТЭЙ БАЙДАЛ

Доор өгөгдсөн ажлын байрны жагсаалт нь олон улсад танигдсан хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдсөн албан тушаалууд бөгөөд үзүүлэлт тус бүрд таарамжийг харуулсан болно. Хамгийн сайн тохирсон нь 100% нийцнэ.
Захиргаа, санхүү, нягтлан бодох бүртгэл, хууль зүй

1	Нягтлан бодогч	98%

2	Нягтлан бодогч, санхүүгийн аудитор	97%

3	Санхүүгийн шинжээч	91%

4	Санхүү хариуцсан захирал	89%

5	Санхүүгийн эрсдэлийн шинжээч	88%

6	Хуульч (байгууллагын)	84%

7	Нотариатч	84%

8	Татварын байцаагч	82%

9	Татварын хуульч	82%

10	Хууль зүйн зохион байгуулагч	80%

11	Хөрөнгийн менежментийн зөвлөх	80%

12	Хуульч	68%

13	Захиргааны ажилтан	64%

14	Шүүгч	64%

15	Үнэт цаасны мэргэжилтэн	51%

16	Банкны ажилтан (хэрэглэгчтэй харилцдаг)	40%

17	Даатгалын мэргэжилтэн	37%
Х1 удаЗладхазэаэ,лихйанрсиудлацлагааа,нымаажриклетатнинг	91%
2	Бүтээгдэхүүн хөгжүүлэлтийн менежер	89%
3	Бизнесийн шинжээч	89%
4	Маркетингийн ажилтан	80%

5	Хангамжийн менежер	78%

6	Дэлгүүрийн менежер	77%

7	Маркетингийн төслийн менежер	71%

8	Түлхүүр харилцагч хариуцсан менежер	68%

9	Худалдааны инженер	62%

10	Дэлгүүрийн хэлтэс хариуцсан менежер	62%

11	Дижитал маркетер	62%

12	Борлуулалтын менежер	58%

13	Цахим худалдааны менежер	57%

14	Олон нийтийн харилцааны ажилтан	57%

15	Гадаад харилцааны ажилтан	55%

16	Рестораны менежер	53%

17	Дэлгүүрийн ажилтан	51%

18	Гар урлалын дэлгүүрийн менежер	49%

19	Талент менежер	49%

20	Сурталчилгааны ахлах ажилтан	49%

21	Онгоцны үйлчлэгч	44%

22	Гадаад харилцааны удирдах ажилтан	44%

23	Аяллын агент	44%

24	Сэтгүүлч	42%

25	Эмийн худалдааны төлөөлөгч
26		Хэрэглэгчийн судалгаанд суурилсан веб хөгжүүлэгч
27	Шууд худалдааны ажилтан	38%
37%

37%

28	Харилцагчийн үйлчилгээний төлөөлөгч	37%

29	Борлуулалтын оператор	35%

30	Байгууллага хоорондын худалдааны менеж	ер	35%

31	Худалдааны менежер	35%

32	Үл хөдлөх хөрөнгийн агент	33%

33	Борлуулалтын багийн ахлагч	33%

34	Бизнес хөгжлийн менежер	31
 
Хүний нөөц, бизнесийн удирдлага
1	Зөвлөх	91%

2	Төслийн менежер	91%

3	Байгууллагын нийгмийн хариуцлагын менежер	84%

4	Сонгон шалгаруулалтын ажилтан	75%

5	Захиргаа, цалингийн тооцооны дарга	75%

6	Карьер хөгжлийн мэргэжилтэн	75%

7	Захирал, Удирдах ажилтан	69%

8	Гүйцэтгэх захирлын туслах	68%

9	Хүний нөөцийн ажилтан	68%

10	Хүний нөөцийн зөвлөх	66%

11	Хүний нөөцийн ахлах ажилтан	66%

12	Оффис менежер	62%
 



Ложистик, мэдээллийн технологи, үйлдвэрлэл, аюулгүй байдал
1	Барилгын сангийн ажилтан	100%

2	Ложистикийн мэргэжилтэн	100%

3	Чанар шалгагч	95%

4	Мэдээллийн технологийн төслийн менежер	95%

5	Бараа тээвэрлэлтийн жолооч	95%

6	Мэдээллийн системийн дарга	91%

7	Барилгын инженер	91%

8	Дата судлаач	88%

9	Талбайн менежер	86%

10	Ахлах програм хөгжүүлэгч	86%

11	Үйлдвэрлэлийн инженер	84%

12	Програм хангамж, хөгжүүлэлтийн инженер	84%

13	Програм шинжээч	84%

14	Цахим орчны аюулгүй байдлын зөвлөх	82%

15	Үйлдвэрлэлийн техникч	82%

16	Судалгааны инженер	77%

17	Үйлдвэрлэлийн дизайнер	77%

18	Онгоцны нисгэгч	77%

19	Вебмастер/Веб хуудасны администратор	75%

20	Агаарын хөдөлгөөнийг хянагч	75%

21	Сүлжээний зохион байгуулагч	75%

22	Ахлах тогооч	71%

23	Вэбсайт үүсгэн байгуулагч хөгжүүлэгч	71%

24	Мэдээллийн технологийн техникч	69%

25	Цагдаагийн комиссар/Дэслэгч	58%

26	Аюулгүй байдлын мэргэжилтэн	57%

27	Цэцэрлэгч	55%

28	Мультимедиа дизайнер	53%

29	Цагдаагийн офицер	48%

30	Зорчигч тээвэрлэлтийн жолооч	42%

31	Тариаланч/Хөдөө Аж Ахуйн ажилтан	37%
 
Шинжлэх ухаан, эрүүл мэнд, хүрээлэн буй орчин
12	Судалгааны техникч (шинжлэх ухаан болон анагаах ухааны)
Эрүүл мэнд/Нийгмийн халамжийн үйлчилгээний менежер
 

82%
82%
 
4	Эмчилгээний техникч	82%

5	Шинжлэх Ухааны судлаач	80%

6	Судалгаа болон хөгжүүлэлтийн инженер	80%

7	Биотехнологийн инженер	78%

8	Малын эмч	75%

9	Шүдний эмч	71%

10	Мэс засалч	68%

11	Байгаль орчны зөвлөх	66%

12	Ерөнхий эмч	62%

13	Эм зүйч	57%

14	Эмчилгээний зөвлөх/Бага эмч	55%

15	Эрүүл мэндийн тусламж үйлчилгээний ажилтан	51%

 
Хиймэл эрхтний төхөөрөмж хийгч (сонсголын, харааны, шүдний гэх мэт)
 
49%
 
17	Мэс заслын эмчийн туслах	48%
18	Сувилагч	48%
 
Физик эмчилгээний эмч/Хөдөлгөөн засалч/ Зүүгээр эмчлэгч/Бариач
20	Хоол тэжээлийн мэргэжилтэн/Хөдөлгөөний мэргэжилтэн /Ижил төрлийн өвчтөнтэй зэрэгцүүлж эмчилдэг мэргэжилтэн
 
48%

44%
 

21	Физик эмчилгээний эмч (сэргээн засварлах)	44%

22	Түргэн тусламжийн эмч	40%

23	Түргэн тусламжийн тэрэгний жолооч	38%

24	Клиникийн сэтгэлзүйч/Сэтгэл зүйгээр эмчлэгч	33%

 



Нийгэм, боловсрол, урлаг, спорт, чөлөөт цаг

ТАЙЛАН
Хувь хүний суурь зан чанар, онцлогийг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ

АГУУЛГА
1.	ХУВЬ ХҮНИЙ ОНЦЛОГ ШИНЖ ЧАНАР
2.	ГРАФИК
3.	ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ХҮСНЭГТ
4.	ТАЙЛБАРУУД
5.	ЯНЗ БҮРИЙН АЖИЛ МЭРГЭЖИЛД ЗОХИЦОХ БАЙДАЛ

















1 - ХУВЬ ХҮНИЙ ОНЦЛОГ ШИНЖ ЧАНАР
Давамгайлах зан чанар
Нийтэч – Эрч хүчтэй байдал (8.4)
Бусдыг ойлгох байдал (9.3)
Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн тэнцвэртэй байдал (2.5)
Нягт нямбай байдал (2.5)
Нээлттэй сэтгэлгээ - Уран сэтгэмж (3.9)
Дараах хүснэгтэд тухайн хүнтэй холбоотой асуулгаас гарсан үр дүнг нэгтгэн үзүүллээ. Баруун талын баганад үндсэн хүчин зүйлийг, зүүн талд эсрэг хүчин зүйлийг харуулсан.✔ нь тухайн хүнд өгсөн оноог илэрхийлнэ. ✔ баруун талын баганад ойр байх тусмаа үндсэн хүчин зүйлтэй төдий чинээ хүчтэй, эсрэгээрээ зүүн талын багана руу дөхөх тутам эсрэг хүчин зүйлээс хүчтэй хамаарах хандлагатай болохыг илтгэнэ.

ЭСРЭГ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛ	A	B	C	D	E	F	G	H	I	J	K	ҮНДСЭН ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛ
Нээлттэй бус
Чимээгүй, нам гүм байхад дуртай, нууцлаг, хүлээцтэй, хичээл зүтгэлтэй
Нийтэч – Эрч хүчтэй байда
Гадаад орчиндоо идэвхтэй нээлттэй, үйл хөдлөлд дуртай, яри
хөөрөөтэй, баяр хөөртэ
Өрсөлдөөнч байдал
Шаардлага өндөртэй, өрсөлдөх хандлагатай, бууж өгдөггүй, хувиа
хичээсэн, заримдаа мэдрэмж дутагддаг
Бусдыг ойлгох байда
Мэдрэмжтэй, санаа зовдо энэрэнгүй, хамтач, санаа нийлдэ уяхан сэтгэлтэй, харилца
зөвшилцдө
Сэтгэл хөдлөл ихтэй
Тогтвортой биш, амархан хариу үйлдэл үзүүлдэг, шүүмжлэлд эмзэг ханддаг, сэтгэл зовиномтгой, стресст амархан автдаг
Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн тэнцвэртэй байдал
Тайван тогтуун, бодлоготой ноомой, асуудалд тайван хандда
Зөн совин, мэдрэмжид тулгуурладаг
Зөн совин мэдрэмжээ дагадаг, аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийдэг, жаахан замбараагүй
Нягт нямбай байдал
Нарийн чанд, найдвартай, гэнэтий зүйлээс зайлсхийдэг, шаргуу шүүмжлэлтэй, хувийн сахилг
баттай
Хуучинсаг үзэл - Бодитоор хандах үзэл
Тогтсон бөгөөд танил дотно зүйлд дуртай, тогтвортой байдлыг хүсдэг, тайван баттай байдаг
Нээлттэй сэтгэлгээ – Урам зоригтой байдаг
Шинэлэг, уран сэтгэмжтэ зүйлсийг хайдаг, мөрөөдөгч, го зүйд мэдрэмжтэй, нэлээд хэдэ сонголт, хувилбартай байх дурта
Тодорхойлолт
Нээлттэй сэтгэлгээ – Уран сэтгэмж нь урлаг, сэтгэл хөдлөл, адал явдал, эх санаа, сониуч байдал, олон янзын туршлагыг үнэлдэг байдал юм. Мөн шинэ санаа бодол, өөрчлөлтүүд дунд хэлбэлзэж байдаг хандлага юм.
Тодорхойлолт
Бусдыг ойлгох байдал нь аливаад тааламжтай байж, дасан зохицох, бусадтай харилцахдаа баяр баясалтай, хамтран ажиллах чадвартай байх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ.



Тодорхойлолт
Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн тэнцвэртэй байдал нь стресстэй нөхцөл байдалд өөртөө итгэлтэй, тайван, биеэ барьж чадах хандлага юм.
Тодорхойлолт
Нийтэч – эрч хүчтэй байдал нь гадаад ертөнцөд илүү санаа тавьж, баяр хөөрийг байнга эрэлхийлж байдаг хандлага юм. Энэ хандлага нь хүний харилцааг зохицуулж, урам зоригтой, яриа үүсгэж чаддаг, өөртөө итгэлтэй, нийтэч байх үндэс болдог. Түүнчлэн олон хүн, том нийгмийн бүлгүүд хамарсан үйл ажиллагаануудаас сэтгэл ханамж авдаг байдлыг илтгэнэ.
Тодорхойлолт
Нягт нямбай байдал нь хувийн сахилга баттай, амжилт ололтод хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй, хариуцлагатай байх хандлага юм. Мөн аливаа зүйлийг гэнэт тооцоололгүй хөдлөхөөс илүүтэй төлөвлөх байдлыг илтгэнэ.
5 - ЯНЗ БҮРИЙН АЖИЛ МЭРГЭЖИЛД ЗОХИЦОХ БАЙДАЛ
Дор дурдсан ажил мэргэжлүүд нь оролцогчийн үзүүлэлтүүдэд тохирч байна.
Олон улсад хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдсөн ажил мэргэжлүүдийн дийлэнх хэсгийг агуулж байгаа багц ерөнхий ажил мэргэжлүүдийг оролцогчийн үзүүлэлтүүдтэй харьцуулан хамааруулах байдлаар дүн шинжилгээ хийнэ.
Төгс нийцэж байгааг 100%-иар илэрхийлнэ.
Зан төлөвтэй нийцэж байгаа мэргэжлүүд



ТАЙЛАН
Борлуулалтын ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ



 



















АГУУЛГА
1.	ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД
2.	ГРАФИК
3.	БҮЛЭГ ГРАФИКУУД
4.	ХУВЬ ХҮНИЙ ОНЦЛОГТ ХАМААРАХ ДҮН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ
5.	ТАЙЛБАР




















Central Test-ийн тусгайлан боловсруулсан Борлуулалтын ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ болон Central Test-ийн лого нь ОУ-ын оюуны өмчийн эрхээр хамгаалагдсан болно. Тиймээс Central Test бичгээр зөвшөөрөл олгоогүй тохиолдолд тус үнэлгээг хуулбарлах, өөрчлөх, засварлахыг хориглоно.
Central Test - Empowering Talent ©2024 Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.
1 - Шалгуур үзүүлэлтүүд
Үнэлгээний хүчин төгөлдөр байдал
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлтээр өндөр оноо авсан бол (нийт 10 онооноос 5 болон түүнээс дээш авсан бол) асуулгад оролцогч/ажил горилогч асуултанд хэтэрхий “нааштай” буюу аль болох эерэг байдлаар хариулахыг хичээсэн байх талтай бөгөөд энэ нь хариултын үнэн бодит байх магадлалыг бууруулж болно. Энэхүү хүчин зүйлийн хувьд дундаж оноо нь 3.0 байна.
Борлуулалтын чадавхын оноо
Тодорхойлолт
Борлуулалтын чадавхын оноо нь тухайн ажилтан, ажил горилогчийн борлуулалтын карьерын чиг хандлага, сонирхлыг өргөн хүрээгээр илэрхийлж гаргана. Хамгийн дээд оноо 100 (онцгой ховор борлуулалтын ажилтан).Энэхүү үзүүлэлт нь арилжааны болон арилжааны бус салбарт ажиллаж байгаа хүмүүс өөр хоорондоо хэр ялгаатай хариулт өгдгийг харуулах бөгөөд борлуулалтын гүйцэтгэл зэрэг бусад гадаад хүчин зүйлийг тооцдог үзүүлэлт юм.
Борлуулалтын овсгоо
самбаа (8.3)







Өөрийгөө хянах чадвар (6.7)
Бусдыг татах чадвар (3.3)
Хэлцэл тохиролцоог амжилттай дуусгах чадвар
(7.1)
Хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээг ойлгох чадвар (5)
Үйлчлүүлэгч, харилцагчийг өөртөө татах чадвар (5)




















Үр дүнг төсөөлүүлэн тайлбарлах чадвар (6.7)
Тэмцэх, даван туулах чадвар (4.3)
Эрэл хайгуул хийх чадвар (2.9)
Харилцаа, холбоо тогтоох чадвар (5)
Хэрэглэгчийг сэтгэл ханамжтай байлгах чадвар (8.3)
Стратеги борлуулалт хийх чадвар (6.7)
  Хэрэглэгч, харилцагч олж авах чадвар	  Бизнес хөгжүүлэх чадвар   Хэлцэл, тохиролцоо хийх чадвар	  Борлуулалт хийх чадвар
 Хэрэглэгч, харилцагч олж авах чадвар (4.1)
Бизнес хөгжүүлэх чадвар (6.7)	Хэлцэл, тохиролцоо хийх
чадвар (6.3)
Борлуулалт хийх чадвар (6.1)

Зарим хувь хүнд хамаарах онцлог шинжүүд өөр хоорондоо зөрчилдөж болно. Энэ нь хүний зан чанарт тохиолддог үнэн бодит байдал юм.
- Та энэхүү тайлангийн “Тайлбар” хэсгээс тухайн хувь хүнд хамаарах онцлог шинжүүдийн дэлгэрэнгүй тодорхойлолтыг харна уу.

Давуу тал
Цаашид хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай тал
Хэрэглэгч, харилцагч олж авах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Шинэ хэрэглэгчийн эрэлд гарсан энэ төрлийн борлуулалтын хүмүүс нь хэрэглэгч олж авах, борлуулалтаа нэлээд хэмжээгээр нэмэгдүүлэхийн тулд шинээр эрэл хайгуул хийх, шинэ зах зээлд нэвтрэхэд анхаарал хандуулдаг. Тэд зорилгодоо хүрэхийн тулд санаачлага гаргаж, зоригтойгоор хийж, шаргуу тэвчээртэй байснаараа байгууллагын мотор нь болж байдаг.

Үйлчлүүлэгч, харилцагчийг өөртөө татах чадвар
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний бусадтай нүүр тулан харилцах, тэднийг тогтоон барих, борлуулалт хийхэд хүргэх төрөлхийн зан авирыг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноотой хүмүүс нь бусад хүмүүсийн анхаарлыг татах, таатай сэтгэгдэл төрүүлэхдээ сайн байдаг. Тэд боломж гарч ирэхийг мэдэрдэг бөгөөд энэ чадвар нь тэднийг үйлчлүүлэгчтэйгээ сайн харилцаа тогтооход тусалдаг. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь хэрэглэгчтэйгээ тааламжтай, биеэ барихгүй харилцахад бэрхшээл учирдаг
Тэмцэх, даван туулах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь борлуулагч хүн борлуулалт хийхдээ хэрхэн өдөөгддөг, зорилгодоо хүрэхэд юу түлхэц болдгийг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноо авсан хүн өрсөлдөөн, хүч сорьсон нөхцөл байдалд дуртай, боломжийг олж авах болон үйлчлүүлэгчтэй харилцаа тогтоохоос татгалздаггүй. Тэд гэнэтийн уналтаас хөл дээрээ хэрхэн зогсохоо мэддэг, илүү олон борлуулалт хийхийн тулд дараагийн зорилго руугаа амжилттай хөдөлдөг. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс өрсөлдөх болон даван туулах чадвар багатай байдаг.
Эрэл хайгуул хийх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний шинэ хэрэглэгч олж авах, ялангуяа утсаар эсвэл гэрээр бараа бүтээгдэхүүн борлуулах сэдэл, эрч хүчийг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь саад бэрхшээлийг даван туулах санаачлага гаргадаг, сонирхолтой, хэрэглэгчийг олж авах чадвартай байдаг. Тэд боломжит хэрэглэгчтэй шууд харилцаа тогтоохын тулд ямар ч арга хэмжээ авахад бэлэн байдаг. Бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь илүү идэвхгүй, шууд маркетинг хийхэд оролцохгүй байх хандлагатай байдаг.
Бизнес хөгжүүлэх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ төрлийн борлуулалтын хүмүүс нь хэрэглэгчийнхээ баазыг бүрдүүлдэг. Тэд танилын хүрээллээ тэлж, түүнийгээ бататгаж, чөлөөтэй, тааламжтай харилцаж чаддаг. Тэд стратегийн буюу бодлоготой харилцаа тогтоох боломж дээр анхаарч, хэрэглэгчидтэйгээ байнга харилцаж, тэвчээртэй, үр дүнтэй ажилладаг.



Харилцаа, холбоо тогтоох чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь хэрэглэгчтэй хэрхэн удаан хугацааны итгэл даахуйц харилцааг бий болгож, хадгалж чадах чадварыг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь танилын хүрээллээ тэлэх, шинэ боломж олж авахын тулд хэрхэн харилцаа холбоо тогтоохоо мэддэг. Тэд ажлаа дотроо бодож төлөвлөж байдаг ба захирал, нөлөө бүхий хүмүүстэй харилцаа тогтооход анхаарал хандуулдаг. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь хэрэглэгчтэй илүү албан ёсны харилцаатай байдаг.
Хэрэглэгчийг сэтгэл ханамжтай байлгах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний хэрэглэгчдэд сайн үйлчилгээ үзүүлэх, сэтгэл ханамж өгөх төрөлхийн хандлагыг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноотой хүмүүс нь өөрийн үйлчилгээний мэдрэмж, тусгайлсан хүсэлтийг зохицуулахад шаардлагатай цаг хугацааг зарцуулахаас татгалздаггүй, үнэнч байдлынхаа ачаар үйлчлүүлэгчийг олж авах чадвартай байдаг. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь хэрэглэгчтэй харилцах харилцааны менежмент, хэрэглэгчийн сэтгэл ханамжид бага анхаарч бусад үүрэг даалгаварт илүү хугацаа зарцуулах хандлагатай байдаг.
Стратеги борлуулалт хийх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний нэлээд хэдэн сарын хугацаа шаардсан нарийн төвөгтэй борлуулалт хийхэд хэр их дуртай болохыг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноо хүмүүс нь гол ашиг олох бүтээгдэхүүнээ удирдаж, хэд хэдэн хүн оролцуулсан онцлог бүхий төсөл хэрэгжүүлж чаддаг. Тэд өөрсдийгөө хэрэглэгчийн түнш байх байр сууринд тавьж, тулгамдсан асуудлыг нарийвчлан судлахад хугацаа зарцуулдаг. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь шууд болон уламжлалт борлуулалт хийхэд илүү чиглэдэг.
Хэлцэл тохиролцоо хийх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Хэлцэл тохиролцоог хийх чадвар нь шинэ хэрэглэгч олж авах болон байгаа хэрэглэгчдэдээ тогтоон барих чадвар сайтай борлуулалтын ажилтнуудад нэн чухал юм. Сайнаар хэлэлцээр хийдэг хүн хэрэглэгчээ сайтар сонсож, борлуулалтын саналаа зохицуулж, бүтээгдэхүүн, үйлчилгээгээ сурталчилж, хамгийн сайн нөхцөлтэй гэрээ хийх зорилго баримтлан ажилладаг
Үр дүнг төсөөлүүлэн тайлбарлах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Үр дүнг төсөөлүүлэн тайлбарлах чадвар гэдэг нь хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээнд нийцсэн бүтээгдэхүүн эсвэл үйлчилгээний онцлогийг тодруулж өгөх чадвар юм. Өндөр оноотой хүмүүс нь чадварлаг илтгэгч ба хэрэглэгч татгалзах үед байдлыг зохицуулах чадвартай, хэрэглэгч бүрийн онцлогт нь тохируулан өөрсдийн саналыг сурталчлан танилцуулах чадвартай. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь хэлэлцээрийн үед амжилттай сурталчилгаа хийхэд бэрхшээл учирдаг.
Хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээг ойлгох чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь хэрэглэгч худалдан авалт хийхэд хүргэх хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээ, шалгуурыг тодорхойлох чадварыг үнэлнэ. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь зөв хэрэглэгчтэй харилцаа тогтоож, хамааралтай асуултыг асууж, өөрсдийн саналаа зөв оновчтой тохируулахыг хичээдэг. Тэд түлхүүр (мэдээлэл, татгалзал, үгэн бус дохио гэх мэт)-ийг хэрхэн хөрвүүлж, өөрсдийн стратегийг зохицуулахаа мэддэг чадвартай байдаг. Энэ хүчин зүйл дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь амжилтад чиглүүлэх хэлэлцээр хийх, мэдээлэл цуглуулахад бага хугацаа зарцуулдаг төдийгүй үр дүн багатай байх магадлалтай.
Хэлцэл тохиролцоог амжилттай дуусгах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
"Хэлцэл тохиролцоог амжилттай дуусгах чадвар" нь ашгийн хэмжээг хадгалан хэрэглэгчээр гэрээнд гарын үсэг зуруулах чадварыг хэлнэ. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь гэрээний хугацаа, нөхцөлийг хэрхэн хэлэлцэхээ мэддэг бөгөөд тэд худалдааг өөдрөг амжилттай байдлаар хааж чаддаг. Бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь гэрээнд гарын үсэг зуруулахыг хичээдэггүй, хэлэлцээр хийхдээ бүтэлгүйтэх эрсдэлтэй
Борлуулалт хийх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ төрлийн борлуулалтын хүмүүс нь шинэ гэрээ хийх, өөртөө итгэлтэй, өөрийгөө хянах чадвартай байдаг ба борлуулалтын овсгоо самбаатай байх төрөлхийн хандлага, чадварыг үнэлдэг. Эдгээр чадвар нь тухайн хүний талаарх мэдээлэл, хувийн онцлог шинж, борлуулалт хийх хэв маягийг тодорхойлдог
Бусдыг татах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Бусдыг татах чадвар нь өөрийнхөө оролцоог илэрхийлэх, дуу хоолойгоо хүргэх чадвар юм. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь өөртөө итгэлтэй байдлаа харуулж, тодорхой хэмжээгээр бусдыг татах чадвартай байдаг. Тэд борлуулалтын хэлэлцээрийн үед ухаалгаар өөрсдөд нь туслах, нөлөө үзүүлэх үзэл бодлыг хялбархан илэрхийлдэг. Энэ хүчин зүйлд бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь бусдын анхаарлыг татахгүй байх эсвэл хэтэрхий хурдан зөвшилцөх хандлагатай байдаг.
Өөрийгөө хянах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Өөрийгөө хянах чадвар нь хэцүү нөхцөл байдлыг удирдан зохицуулах чадвар юм. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь тайван байж, хүмүүсийг эвлэрүүлэх, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах чадвартай байдаг. Тэд хяналтаас гарсан ямар ч уналт, үйл явдал тулгарсан урам зоригтой байж чаддаг. Тэд сэтгэлээр унагасан нөхцөл байдалд зорилгоо умартдаггүй. Энэ хүчин зүйлд бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь борлуулалтын хэлэлцээрт цочмог хандах магадлалтай. Мөн тэд таамаглаж байсны дагуу үр дүн гараагүй тохиолдолд тэвчээргүй хандах хандлагатай байдаг
Борлуулалтын овсгоо самбаа
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний борлуулалт хийх, хэлэлцээр хийх, ашиг орлого олохдоо хэр сэтгэл хангалуун байдгийг үнэлдэг. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь борлуулах үйл явцыг тоглоомтой адилтган үздэг. Алхам бүр нь хожих хэрэгтэй тоглоомын үе шат байдаг. Тэд төрөлхийн зоригтой байж бусдыг ятгах, сайн хэлцэл хийх дуртай байдаг. Энэ хүчин зүйлд бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь борлуулалт хийхийг тоглоом гэхээсээ үүрэг хариуцлага гэж үзэж үл итгэсэн, тээнэгэлзсэн хандлагатай байдаг.


МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН ТЕСТИЙН НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАН




























1.1 ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ЗОРИЛГО 
 
    Энэхүү үнэлгээний зорилго нь менежерүүдийн хандлага чадамжийг үнэлэн, ажилтануудад өөрийгөө таних давуу, сул тулуудаа шинжлэх ухааны үндэслэлтэйгээр тодорхойлон дүгнэхэд чиглэнэ. Үнэлгээний үр дүн нь ажилтны удирдах түвшинд ажиллах нөөц боломжийг тодорхойлох, цаашдын хөгжлийн төлөвлөгөөг боловсруулахад суурь мэдээлэл болно. Тус үнэлгээгээр:

•	Менежерийн  19 зан чанар 
•	Хандлагын 4 бүлэг 
•	Менежерийн 7 хэв маяг
•	Сэтгэлгээний 4 хэв маяг
•	Ажиллах 4 хэв маяг 
•	Уялдаа холбоо бүхий 9 бүлгийн 59 чадамжын жагсаалтыг тодорхойлно. 

1.2 ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ АРГАЧЛАЛ, АШИГЛАСАН ХЭМЖҮҮР 
 
▪	Ашигласан тест: Central Test Personality Inventory R-Үнэлгээ 
▪	Тестийн ангилал: Менежерийн хандлага ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ 
▪	Үнэлгээний үзүүлэлт: Менежер хүнд байх ёстой 19 зан чанар, хандлагын 4 бүлэг, сэтгэлгээний хэв маяг, ажиллах хэв маяг 9 бүлгийн 59 ур чадварын үзүүлэлт  
▪	Ур чадвар бүр 0-100 оноогоор үнэлэгдсэн. 
▪	Олон нийтэд таалагдах байдлыг асуулгын аргаар хэмжинэ. 
▪	Оноог автоматаар боловсруулж, хувь хүний болон байгууллагын түвшний дундаж, максимум, минимум утгуудыг тодорхойлоно. 
▪	Оноо 3 түвшинд хуваагдсан: 
1-түвшин: 
▪	Олон нийтэд таалагдах байдлыг 5-аас их байвал хүчингүйд тооцно  
2-р түвшин: 
•	0-39% Менежерийн чадавх сул гэж илэрхийлнэ. 
•	40-59% Менежерийн чадавх дунд гэж илэрхийлнэ. 
•	60-100% Менежерийн чадавх өндөр гэж илэрхийлнэ. 
 3-р түвшин: 
▪	70-100: Сайн хөгжсөн буюу баталгаатай түвшин  
▪	50-69: Хөгжиж буй, дундаж түвшин 
▪	0-49: Хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай


















2.1	МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН ЧАДАВХЫН ОНОО

     Менежерийн чадавх гэдэг нь үнэлгээнд хамрагдагчийн менежерийн үүргийг гүйцэтгэж чадах чадварыг илэрхийлэх бөгөөд 0-100 оноогоор үнэлэнэ. Өндөр оноо нь баг хамт олныг удирдах, үүрэг хариуцлага хүлээх, кохих шийдвэр гаргах чадвар бүхийн чадварлаг менежер гэдгийг илэрхийлнэ.  
	 
Хүснэлт 1. Үнэлгээний хүчин төгөлдөр байдал болон менежерийн чадамжийн онооны үзүүлэлт хүснэгт 
№	Тестийн нэр 	Ажилтны нууцлалын код	Тестийн хүчин төгөлдөр байдал          /5-с дээш оноо авсан тохиолдолд хүчингүй/	Менежерийн чадамжийн оноо  /Дээд оноо 100, 40-с дээш оноог  менежерийн чадамжтай гэж үзнэ/ 
1	CTPI-R	859208	0.9	50
2	CTPI-R	859210	0.9	50
3	CTPI-R	859212	3.6	57
4	CTPI-R	859214	0.9	43
5	CTPI-R	859216	0.9	51
6	CTPI-R	859218	2.7	42
7	CTPI-R	859220	1.8	51
8	CTPI-R	859222	2.7	54
9	CTPI-R	859224	0.9	52
10	CTPI-R	859226	4.5	56
11	CTPI-R	859228	1.8	57
12	CTPI-R	859230	2.7	58
13	CTPI-R	859232	1.8	55
14	CTPI-R	859234	1.8	44
15	CTPI-R	859236	0.9	55
16	CTPI-R	859238	1.8	60
17	CTPI-R	859240	1.8	50
18	CTPI-R	859242	0.9	54
19	CTPI-R	859244	3.6	57
20	CTPI-R	859246	0.9	56
21	CTPI-R	859248	0	48
22	CTPI-R	859250	1.8	75
23	CTPI-R	859252	3.6	53
24	CTPI-R	859254	0.9	53
25	CTPI-R	859256	1.8	52
26	CTPI-R	859258	1.8	50
27	CTPI-R	859260	2.7	55
28	CTPI-R	859262	2.7	57
29	CTPI-R	859264	2.7	70
30	CTPI-R	859266	0	46
31	CTPI-R	859268	0.9	55
Менежерийн чадамжийн оноо дунджаар 	54

ДҮГНЭЛТ:

Менежерийн чадамжын оноог 0-100 онооны хооронд хэмжих бөгөөд ажилтан тус бүр 60-аас дээш оноог менежерийн чадавх өндөр, 40-59 оноог менежерийн чадавх дунд, 39-аас доош оноог менежерийн чадавх сул буюу хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual\ гэж үзнэ. 
Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК  менежерийн чадавхын дундаж оноо 54 байна. 2025 он хүртэлх Централ тест олон улсын сэтгэл зүйн үнэлгээний Менежерийн ур чадварын тестэнд хамрагдсан Монгол менежерүүдиийн чадавхын дундаж оноо 50-60 хооронд хэлбэлздэг бөгөөд тус байгууллагын 54 оноо бол дундаж утгыг илэрхийлэх бөгөөд цаашид хөгжих боломж өндөртэй гэж тодорхойлно. 

2.2	 МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН ХАНДЛАГЫН 4 БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ

Менежерийн хандлагыг 4 бүлэг 19 үзүүлэлтээр:

•	Бусдыг удирдах хандлага 
•	Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлага
•	Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлага
•	Ажилдаа хандах хандлагыг хэмжин тодорхойлдог. 

2.2.1 БУСДЫГ УДИРДАХ ХАНДЛАГА

       Бусдыг удирдах хандлага гэдэг нь  хувь хүн бусдад хүндэтгэлтэй, эелдэг харилцахын зэрэгцээ өөрийн байр суурийг тууштай хамгаалж, нөхцөл байдлыг стратегийн түвшинд удирдан хяналт тавих, итгэл төрүүлж, бусдын хөгжлийг дэмжих замаар үр нөлөөтэй манлайлал үзүүлэх хандлагыг илэрхийлдэг. Тус хандлага нь эелдэг нээлттэй, өөрийн үзэл бололд тууштай, хяналт тавьдаг, бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг, тактикч, итгэл хүлээлгэдэг гэх 6 зан чанараас бүрдэнэ.  \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual

 Тайлбар: Доорх хүснэгтэнд Бусдыг удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 6 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн оноог дэлгэрэнгүй танилцуулж байна. Дундаж онооны тайлбар буюу тухайн байгууллагын менежерийн зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээр илэрч буй онцлогийг тайлбарлаж сайжруулах зөвлөмжийн хамт хавсаргасан болно.  Зан чанарын үзүүлэлт оноонд сайн муу зан чанар гэсэн ойлголт  байхгүй бөгөөд зөвхөн зан чанарын онцлогыг илэрхийлдэг болохыг анхаарна уу.  

Жич: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг хавсралт хэсгээс  харна уу. 

Хүснэгт 1: Бусдыг удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 6 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн дундаж     
онооны тайлбар, сайжруулах зөвлөмж  

Зан чанар 	Дундаж оноо	Хамгийн өндөр	Хамгийн бага	Дундаж онооны тайлбар 	 Сайжруулах зөвлөмж 

Эелдэг нээллтэй	5.1	7.8	1.9	Хүмүүстэй дотно нөхөрсөг харилцаа тогтоодог ч заримдаа орчны нөхцөл байдлаас хамаарч нээлттэй найрсаг байдалаа алддаг.  	Заримдаа эелдэг нээллтэй байдлаа алдаж багийн уур амьсгалд сөргөөр нөлөөлөх талтай учраас баг хамт олны итгэлцлийг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлагатай. 

Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай	4.6	7.2	2.2	Өөрийн үзэл бодлоо илэрхийлж, өөрийн байр сууриа тогтвортой хадгалхад заримдаа бэрхшээлтэй байна.  	Өөрийн бодлыг хүндэтгэлтэй зөвөөр илэрхийлэх, сөрөг байр суурийг эерэгээр илэрхийлэх, итгэл төрүүлэх үг хэллэг , биеийн хэлэмж зэргээр дамжуулан энэ хандлагыг сайжруулж болно. 

Хяналт тавьдаг	3.8	6.9	1.1	Удирдлагын оролцоо, хяналтын хувьд хүмүүсийн арга эвийг олж эвтэйхэн  хяналт тавих гэж хичээдэг.  Багийн гишүүдийн чадамж, онцлог зэргээс хамаарч хяналт тавих арга хэлбэрээ өөрчилөх гэж ороддог ч зарим тохиолдолд уян хатан чанар дутагддаг талтай. 
 	Бусдад итгэж даатгах, хариуцлага хуваарилах чадвар сул талтай учраас тодорхой зорилт, шалгууртай даалгавар өгч сурах, хяналт бус дэмжлэг үзүүлэх зорилгоор ажлын гүйцэтгэлд анхаарах check list, санал хүсэлт өгөх, авах арга барилуудаар дамжуулан сайжруулж болно.  
Бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг	5.6	8.9	3.9	Багийн гишүүдээ сургаж хөгжүүлэх сонирхолтой. Бусдын ур чадварыг хөгжүүлэх, тэднийг чадваржуулахад анхаардаг ч заримдаа гүйцэтгэлд анхаарал хандуулж чадахгүй байх магадлал өндөр байдаг. 	Хүмүүсийг дэмжих, чиглүүлэх хандлагагыг тогтмол хэвшүүлэх нь чухал ач холбогдолтой.Зөвлөмж өгөх, хөгжүүлэх боломжийг үргэлжлүүлж дадал болгон хэвшүүлж нь ажлын нэг хэсэг болгох нь чухал  юм. 
Тактикч	5.0	6.9	0.3	Харилцаанд аль болох зөөлөн эв, дүйтэй  харилцахыг хичээдэг. Гэхдээ нээлттэй санал хэлэх, шүүмжлэх, эсрэг байр суурь зэргээ илэрхийлхэд эв дүйтэй, бодлоготой байдлаа хадгалахад хүндрэлтэй байдаг талтай. 	Заримдаа том зургаар харах чадвар сул, нарийн арга зам тодорхойлохдоо хэт болгоомжтой ханддаг. Шийдвэр гаргах үедээ нөхцөл байдлын хувилбаруудыг тооцох, тодруулах арга замыг хэрэгжүүлж болно.
Итгэл хүлээлгэдэг	5.6	8.1	3.6	Бусдад итгэдэг ч гэлээ зарим үед хэтэрхий ажигч гярхай, сэжиглэнгүй  байх талтай. 	Хамт олны уур амьсгалыг бэхжүүлэх, үүрэг даалгаваруудыг  тодорхой болгох шаардлагатай. 


 
БУСДЫГ УДИРДАХ ХАНДЛАГЫГ САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

CTPI тестийн Бусдыг удирдах бүлгийн зургаан зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээс харахад удирдах түвшний ажилтнуудын бусдыг хөгжүүлэх, итгэл хүлээлгэх, эелдэг нээлттэй байх зэрэг үзүүлэлтүүд өндөр түвшинд байна. Харин тактикч байх, өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх, хяналт тавих зэрэг үзүүлэлтүүдийг цаашид сайжруулах шаардлагатай байна. 

Эдгээр зан чанарууд нь зөвхөн менежерийн хувьд бус, багийн дотоод манлайлал болон хамтын ажиллагаанд оролцогч бүх гишүүдэд чухал нөлөөтэй тул дараах хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжийг санал болгож байна.
•	Сэтгэл зүйн таатай орчныг бүрдүүлэх:
Багийн гишүүдийн хооронд итгэлцэлд суурилсан харилцааг бий болгохын тулд идэвхтэй сонсох, хамтран ойлгох ур чадварыг хөгжүүлэх хэрэгтэй. Үүний зэрэгцээ сэтгэл хөдлөлөө таних, удирдах чадвар буюу сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюун ухаан (EQ)-ыг системтэйгээр хөгжүүлэх арга замыг эрэлхийлэх
•	Зөрчил зохицуулалт ба шийдвэр гаргалт:
Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх, бусдад нөлөөлөх чадварыг зоригтой бөгөөд хүндэтгэлтэйгээр хэрэгжүүлэхийн тулд role-play болон симуляцийн дасгалуудыг ашиглан зөрчилтэй нөхцөл байдлыг шийдвэрлэх дадлага хийх.
•	Гүйцэтгэлийн удирдлага
Ажлын үр дүнг сайжруулахын тулд SMART зарчимд тулгуурлан зорилго тодорхойлох, гүйцэтгэлийг үнэлэх зэргийг тогтмол хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.
•	Өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох ба уян хатан байдал:
Өөрчлөгдөж буй нөхцөлд үр дүнтэй шийдвэр гаргах, харилцааны уян хатан байдлыг нэмэгдүүлэхийн тулд өөрчлөлтийн менежмент болон манлайллын хөгжлийн хөтөлбөрүүдэд тогтмол хамрагдах нь чухал. Мөн ажил ба хувийн амьдралын тэнцвэр, сэтгэл зүйн эрүүл, аюулгүй байдлыг хадгалах чиглэлээрх сургалтад идэвхтэй оролцох нь зүйтэй.


2.2.2 АЖИЛДАА ХАНДАХ ХАНДЛАГА 

      Ажилдаа хандах хандлага гэдэг нь хувь хүний ажил үүргээ гүйцэтгэх үедээ үзүүлдэг зохион байгуулалт, сахилга бат, зарчимч байдал, тогтвортой хандлагын нэгдэл бөгөөд энэ нь байгууллагын тогтолцоонд нийцэх, урт хугацааны гүйцэтгэлд чиглэсэн, үр дүнтэй, найдвартай байдал зэрэг хандлага юм. Тус хандлага нь нотолгоонд суурилсан шийдвэр гаргалт, дүрэм журмыг баримтлагч, зохион байгуулалттай ажиллах зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээр илэрдэг. \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual\

Тайлбар: Доорх хүснэгтэнд ажилдаа хандах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 3 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн оноог дэлгэрэнгүй танилцуулж байна. Дундаж онооны тайлбар буюу тухайн байгууллагын зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээр илэрч буй онцлогийг тайлбарлаж, сайжруулах зөвлөмжийн хамт хавсаргасан болно.  Зан чанарын үзүүлэлт оноонд сайн, муу зан чанар гэсэн ойлголт  байхгүй бөгөөд зан чанарын онцлогыг илэрхийлдэг болохыг анхаарна уу.  

Жич: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг хавсралт хэсгээс  харна уу. 

Хүснэгт 2: Ажилдаа хандах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 3 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн дундаж     
онооны тайлбар сайжруулах зөвлөмж  

Зан чанар	Дундаж оноо	Хамгийн бага	Хамгийн их	Дундаж онооны тайлбар 	Сайжруулах зөвлөмж

Хууль, дүрэм журмыг сахидаг	6.9	4.4	9.2	Аливаа дүрэм, журмыг ихэнхдээ дагаж мөрддөг ч өөрчлөлт шинэчлэлт хийхийг эрмэлздэг.  
 	Дүрэм журмын хэрэгцээ шаардлагыг ойлгож ухамсарлаж ач холбогдолыг ажилдаа уялдуулах, өөрийн шийдвэрийг байгууллагын бодлого үнэт зүйлстэй нэгтгэх замаар сайжруулж болно.  
Зохион байгуулалттай тууштай	5.1	1.1	8.9	Ажилдаа тууштай, зорилгодоо үнэнч ханддаг боловч зарим үед анхаарал саринах, төлөвлөгөөний биелэлт алдагддаг. Ачаалал ихэссэн үед бүтээмж тогтворгүй болж цагийн менежмент, ажил хуваарилалт зэрэг нь сулардаг талтай. 	Зорилгодоо хүрэх тогтвортой байдал, зорилтот төлөвлөлт зэргийг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай. Цагийн менежмент, зорилго төлөвлөлтийн арга барилыг сайжруулах замаар сайжруулах боломжтой. 
Баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурладаг	7.3	5	10	Шийдвэр гаргахдаа ихэвчлэн бодит баримт, нотолгоо логикт тулгуурладаг. Гэхдээ зарим үед зөн совин бүтээлч хандагыг үгүйсгэх эрсдэл бий болдог.	Асуудалд дүн шинжилгээ хийх чадвараа сайжруулахын зэрэгцээ уян хатан шийдвэр гаргах ур чадварыг дээшлүүлэхийн тулд  зуршил болгох шаардлагатай. 
 
Ажилдаа хандах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 3 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн график 

 

АЖИЛДАА ХАНДАХ ХАНДЛАГЫГ САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

     CTPI тестийн Ажилдаа хандах хандлага бүлгийн гурван зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээс харахад удирдах түвшний ажилтнуудад баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурладаг, хууль, дүрэм журмыг сахидаг хандлага давамгай байна. Харин зохион байгуулалттай, тууштай байх чанарыг цаашид төлөвшүүлж, сайжруулах шаардлага байна.  Эдгээр зан чанарууд нь байгууллагын дотоод соёл, ажлын сахилга бат, шийдвэр гаргах чанарт чухал нөлөөтэй тул дараах хөгжүүлэх арга зам,  зөвлөмжийг хүргэж  байна.

Хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжүүд:
•	Аналитик сэтгэлгээг хөгжүүлэх: 
Баримт, мэдээлэлд тулгуурлан оновчтой шийдвэр гаргах чадварыг хөгжүүлэхийн тулд асуудлыг системтэйгээр задлан шинжлэх, учир шалтгааны холбоог зураглах аргачлалыг ашиглах нь үр дүнтэй. Үүнд “root cause analysis”, “mind mapping”, “systems thinking” зэрэг арга зүйг хэрэглэхийг зөвлөж байна.
•	Өөрчлөлтөд уян хатан хандах чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх:
Өөрчлөлтөнд тохирсон шийдвэр гаргах, нөхцөл байдалд нийцүүлэн үйл ажиллагаагаа зохицуулах уян хатан байдлыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай. Үүнийг situation-based learning, adaptive decision-making зэрэг сургалтын аргаар дэмжиж болох бөгөөд бодит кейс дээр суурилсан сургалтад тогтмол хамрагдах нь үр дүнтэй байдаг. 

2.2.3 ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ УДИРДАХ ХАНДЛАГА 

       Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлага нь хувь хүний сэтгэл хөдлөлөө зохицуулах, урам зоригтой байх, бэрхшээлийг даван туулах, ажлын идэвх санаачилгатай оролцох, зорилгодоо үнэнч хандах зан төлөвийн нийлбэр бөгөөд энэ нь хувь хүний сэтгэлзүйн тэсвэр тэвчээр, өөдрөг хандлага, өөртөө итгэх итгэл зэргээр илэрдэг. Энэхүү хандлага нь хувь хүнийг тогтвортой гүйцэтгэлтэй, аливаа нөхцөл байдалд дасан зохицох чадвартай, зорилгодоо төвлөрч ажилладаг хүн болгон төлөвшүүлэхэд чухал үүрэгтэй. Тус хандлага нь ажлын төлөө, идэвхтэй, өөдрөг үзэлтэй, өөртөө итгэлтэй, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг, зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй гэх 6 зан чанараас бүрдэнэ.  \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual\

 
Тайлбар: Доорх хүснэгтэнд Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 6 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн оноог дэлгэрэнгүй танилцуулж байна. Дундаж онооны тайлбар буюу тухайн байгууллагын зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээр илэрч буй онцлогийг тайлбарлаж сайжруулах зөвлөмжийн хамт хавсаргасан болно.  Зан чанарын үзүүлэлт оноонд сайн муу зан чанар гэсэн ойлголт  байхгүй бөгөөд зан чанарын онцлогыг илэрхийлдэг болохыг анхаарна уу.  

Жич: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг хавсралт хэсгээс  харна уу. 


Хүснэгт 3: Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 6 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн дундаж     
онооны тайлбар сайжруулах зөвлөмж  

Зан чанар 	Дундаж оноо 	Хамгийн их  	Хамгийн бага 	Дундаж онооны тайлбар 
	Сайжруулах зөвлөмж
Ажлын төлөө	6.5	8.9	4.2	Ажилдаа хариуцлагатай, ажилдаа үнэ цэнэ өгдөг. Өөрийн ажлын гүйцэтгэл, үр дүнг сайн байлгахад эрмэлздэг ч  урам зориг, хариуцлагатай байдал нь тогтвортой байж чаддаггүй. 	 Урам зориг хариуцлагатай байдлаа нэмэгдүүлэхийн тулд өдөр бүр богино дүгнэлт хийх өнөөдөр юу хийсэн бэ үр бүтээмжээ тодорхойлох тэмдэглэх байдлаар зуршил бүтээх 
Идэвхтэй	4.4	8.6	1.9	Санаачлагатай, үйл ажиллагаанд идэвхтэй хамрагдах, шинэ санаа дэвшүүлэх, манлайлах оролдлого нь тогтмол байж чаддаггүй. 	Өөрийн санал санаачлалгыг өргөжүүлэх, хүлээлтгүйгээр эхлэх сэтгэлгээг төлөвшүүлэх нь чухал 
Өөдрөг үзэлтэй	6.1	8.1	4.4	Аливаад өөдрөг эрч хүчтэй ханддаг. Гэсэн хэдий зарим үед хэт өөдрөг байдлаас эрсдэлийг дутуу тооцох магадлалтай. 	Аливаад бодитой хандаж, эерэг сөрөг талыг давамгайлуулахгүй байх шаардлагатай. Бусдад урам зориг өгөх, орчиндоо эерэг хандлага түгээх замаар сайжруулж болно. 
Өөртөө итгэлтэй	5.9	8.3	2.8	Хувийн чадамждаа итгэлтэй. Гэвч бие дааж шийдвэр гаргах үедээ эргэлздэ, бусдын дэмжлэгийг авахаас нааш баттай шийдвэр гаргаж чаддаггүй байх талтай. 	Өөрийгөө хамгаалах, итгэлтэй харилцах чадвараа тодорхой болгох, амжилт ололтоо хүлээн зөвшөөрч өөртөө итгэх сэтгэл зүйг төлөвшүүлэх шаардлагатай. 
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө
хянадаг	6.4	10	5.6	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянан зохицуулхад зарим тохиолдолд хүндрэлтэй байдаг. Стресс дарамтанд орсон үедээ  хэт мэдрэмтгий байдал ажиглагддаг.	Эерэг үед тайван ч, сөрөг нөхцөлд уур бухимдал, хэт мэдрэмтгий байдал ажиглагдаж болзошгүй тул тухайн үед мэдэрч буй сэтгэл хөдлөлөө таньж мэдэх, нэрлэх, зөв аргаар тайвшируулж зохицуулалт хийж сурах шаардлагатай. 
Зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй	6.0	7.2	2.8	Тодорхой зорилго тавих, түүнийгээ бүрэн дүүрэн биелүүлэх  гэж хичээдэг.  Шинэ сорилтонд дуртай хэдий ч тасралтгүй тууштай дуусгах чадвар дутагдана. 	Удаан хугацааны төслүүдэд урам зориг алдагдах, хойш тавих байдал ажиглагддаг учраас аливааг зорилт болгон задлаж, үе шаттай ажиллах, хийж дуусгах үедээ урамшлыг мэдрэхэд анхаарах нь чухал. 




 




ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ УДИРДАХ ХАНДЛАГЫГ САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

     CTPI тестийн  Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлага  бүлгийн зургаан зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээс харахад удирдах түвшний ажилтнуудын хувьд ажлын төлөө хандлага, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах чадвар зэрэг үзүүлэлтүүд илүү давамгай байна. Мөн өөдрөг үзэлтэй байдал, зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэл эрмэлзэл зэрэг зан чанарууд тодорхой хэмжээнд төлөвшсөн нь ажиглагдлаа.
Гэсэн хэдий ч өөртөө итгэлтэй байх, идэвх санаачилгатай хандлага зэрэг үзүүлэлтүүдийг цаашид хөгжүүлж, бэхжүүлэх шаардлага байна. Энэ нь манлайллын үр нөлөөг нэмэгдүүлж, шийдвэр гаргах зоримог байдал, стратегийн гүйцэтгэлийг сайжруулах үндэс болно.

Хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжүүд:

•	Өөртөө итгэх итгэлийг нэмэгдүүлэх:
Coaching, mentoring хөтөлбөрт хамрагдах замаар  манлайллын арга барилп суралцах, өөртөө итгэх итгэлээ нэмэгдүүлэх 
•	Идэвх санаачилгыг дэмжих:
Шинэ санаачилга гаргах, төслийн хүрээнд удирдан оролцох боломжийг өргөжүүлэх.
Ажлын зорилго, үнэт зүйлтэйгээ уялдсан урам зоригийн эх үүсвэрийг тодорхойлох 
•	Өөдрөг хандлагыг бататгах:
Сөрөг нөхцөлд эерэг сэтгэлгээг хадгалах дасгал хийж хэрэгжүүлэх, багаар ажиллах үед амжилтыг хамтдаа тэмдэглэх, эерэг дадал бий болгох. Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн уян хатан байдлыг хөгжүүлэх зорилгоор emotional resilience training эсвэл mindfulness сургалтанд хамрагдах.
•	Зорилго төвтэй манлайллыг хөгжүүлэх:
SMART зарчимд тулгуурлан зорилго тодорхойлох, хэрэгжилтийг хянах механизмыг тогтмолжуулах, богино болон дунд хугацааны зорилтод тулгуурласан үр дүнгийн үнэлгээг багийн түвшинд хэрэгжүүлэх.
•	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах чадварыг гүнзгийрүүлэх:
Стрессийн нөхцөлд тайван, бодитой шийдвэр гаргах чадварыг хөгжүүлэх зорилгоор сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийдэх болон стресс менежмент сургалтад хамрагдах.
  
 2.2.4 ӨӨРЧЛӨЛТИЙГ УДИРДАХ ХАНДЛАГА 

     Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлага гэдэг нь хувь хүний шинэ санаа, нөхцөл байдалд нээлттэй хандах, дасан зохицох, шинийг санаачлах болон хэрэгжүүлэх эрмэлзлэлтэй байдал бөгөөд хувь хүн хурдан хувьсаж буй орчинд үр дүнтэй ажиллах, шинэ сорилтод бүтээлчээр хандах, байгууллагын стратегийн өөрчлөлтийг дэмжихэд чухал нөлөө үзүүлдэг. 
Тус хандлага нь үйлдэлд чиглэсэн, дасан зохицдог, шинийг туршдаг, зөн совин алсын хараатай гэх 4 зан чанараас бүрдэнэ.  \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual\

Тайлбар: Доорх хүснэгтэнд өөрчлөлтийг  удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 4 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн оноог дэлгэрэнгүй танилцуулж байна. Онооны тайлбар хэсэгт дундаж онооны тайлбар буюу тухайн байгууллагын зан чанарын үзүүлэлтээр илэрч буй онцлогийг тайлбарлаж сайжруулах зөвлөмжийн хамт хавсаргасан болно.  Зан чанарын үзүүлэлт оноонд сайн муу зан чанар гэсэн ойлголт  байхгүй бөгөөд зан чанарын онцлогыг илэрхийлдэг болохыг анхаарна уу.  

Жич: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг хавсралт хэсгээс  харна уу. 

Хүснэгт 4: Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 4 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн дундаж онооны тайлбар сайжруулах зөвлөмж  
Үзүүлэлт 	Дундаж оноо 	Хамгийн бага 	Хамгийн их 	Онооны 
тайлбар 	Сайжруулах зөвлөмж 

Үйлдэлд чиглэсэн	3.2	0.3	4.7	Шинэ санаа гаргаж, төлөвлөх хэдий ч үйлдэлд шилжүүлэх, шуурхай хэрэгжүүлэх хандлага сул байх талтай. 
 	
Аливаа ажлыг төлөвлөх үедээ, цагийн хүрээ тогтоох, урт хугацааны зорилго,зорилттой уясан төлөвлөлт гаргах замаар сайжруулах боломжтой. 

Дасан зохицдог	3.6	1.7	8.6	Шинэ нөхцөл, өөрчлөлтөд хэт болгоомжтой, эсэргүүцэлтэй ханддаг. Амархан дарамтанд ордог байх талтай. 	Аливаад шинэ арга барилаар хандах гэж хичээх, өдөр бүр жижиг өөрчлөлтийн дадлыг хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай. 
Шинийг туршдаг	5.9	1.7	8.9	Шинэ санаа турших, аливааг өөр аргаар хийх зориг, сонирхол тодорхой хэмжээнд илэрдэг боловч тууштай, тогтмол шинийг туршигч байж чаддаггүй. 
 	Шинэ санал санаачлага гаргах ч гэлээ тогтвортой үргэлжлүүлэх чадварыг сайжруулах бодит зорилт болгон задлах замаар хэрэгжүүлж болно. 
Зөн совин алсын хараатай	5.6	2.5	7.5	Хувь хүнд тодорхой түвшинд ирээдүйг төсөөлөх, урт хугацааны чиг баримжаа барих сэтгэлгээ байгаа ч тогтвортой биш, алсын хараа төлөвлөлт нь бодит байдалтай нийцэхгүй байж мэдэх талтай. 

	Аливаад тууштай байх, багийг чиглүүлэх манлайлалд суралцах замаар сайжруулах, ирээдүйн дүр зургийг тодорхойлж, зорилгодоо төвлөрөх. 


Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлагыг бүрдүүлдэг 4 зан чанарын үзүүлэлтийн график 

 


ӨӨРЧЛӨЛТИЙГ УДИРДАХ ХАНДЛАГЫГ САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

  CTPI тестийн  Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлага  бүлгийн онооны дүнгээс үзэхэд ажилтнуудын шинэ зүйлд санаачлагатай ханддаг, зөн совин, алсын хараатай байдал өндөр түвшинд хөгжсөн байна. Харин эсрэгээрээ шинэ нөхцөл байдалд дасан зохицох чадвар, шийдвэрийг шууд үйлдэл болгон хэрэгжүүлэх чадвар харьцангуй сул байна. 
Энэхүү бүлгийн үзүүлэлт нь хувь хүний өөрчлөлт, шинэчлэлд дасан зохицох, эрсдэл үүрч, тодорхойгүй нөхцөлд шийдвэр гаргах сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдал болон гүйцэтгэлийн хурдыг илэрхийлдэг.

Хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжүүд: 

•	Өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх:
Өөрчлөлтийг аюул бус боломж гэж хүлээн авах сэтгэлзүйн хандлагыг төлөвшүүлэх сургалтад хамрагдах.
Туршилт, шинэ санаачилга бүхий жижиг төсөл,  ажлуудад оролцож, тодорхойгүй нөхцөлд шийдвэр гаргах дадал бий болгох.
•	Шийдвэрийг үйлдэл болгон хэрэгжүүлэх чадварыг сайжруулах:
“80/20” зарчим буюу мэдээллийн тодорхой түвшинд хүрмэгц шийдвэр гаргаж, туршилтаар хэрэгжүүлэх дадал хэвшүүлэх, зорилгыг богино хугацааны үйлдэл болгон төлөвлөж, хэрэгжилтийг хэмжих KPI системийг ашиглах.
•	Алсын хараа ба зөн совинг бодит төлөвлөгөөтэй уялдуулах:
Стратегийн зорилгыг тодорхой, хэмжигдэхүйц алхмуудад хувааж, хэрэгжилтийн хяналтыг тогтмолжуулах, багийн түвшинд шинэ санааг бодитоор хэрэгжүүлэхийн тулд хариуцлага, хугацаа хянах менежментийг сайжруулах.



3.МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН ХЭВ МАЯГИЙН  ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ
 
Менежерийн хэв маяг гэдэг нь тухайн хүний удирдлагын чиг үүргийг хэрхэн гүйцэтгэдэг, шийдвэр гаргах, бусдад нөлөөлөх, зорилго тодорхойлох, өөрчлөлтийг удирдах зэрэгт хэрхэн ханддаг сэтгэлгээ, зан чанаруудын хослолыг хэлдэг. 

•	Гүйцэтгэгч хэв маягийн менежер 
•	Манлайлагч хэв маягийн менежер
•	Энтерпрайнер хэв маягийн менежер 
•	Төслийн менежер
•	Хамгаалагч хэв маягийн менежер 
•	Стратегч хэв маягийн менежер 
•	Идэвхжүүлэгч хэв маягийн менежер гэх 7 хэв маяг байна. 
 
3.1 МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН ХЭВ МАЯГ


Хүснэгт 5: Менежерийн 7 хэв маягийн дундаж онооны тайлбар 

Менежерийн хэв маяг 	Дундаж оноо 	Хамгийн бага 	Хамгийн их 
	Дундаж онооны тайлбар 
Гүйцэтгэгч хэв маягийн менежер	59.6	45.7	76.5	Аливаа даалгаврыг төлөвлөсөн ёсоор тууштай биелүүлэх, хэрэгжилтийг хангадаг ч үйл ажиллагааны тасралтгүй байдлыг хадгалах өдөр тутмын ажлыг үр дүнтэй гүйцэтгэх тал дээр анхаарах шаардлагатай.

  
Манлайлагч хэв маягийн менежер	56.8	42.2	68.5	Хүмүүсийг манлайлах, хамт олныг чиглүүлэх манлайлагч ч гэлээ өөртөө итгэх байдал, бусдад итгэл төрүүлэх, бат бөх харилцаа тогтоох зэргийг сайжруулах шаардлага ажиглагддаг. 



Энтерпрайнер хэв маягийн менежер	57.1	43.1	79.9	Бизнесийн боломж эрэлхийлэх, эрсдэлийг тооцож шийдвэр гаргах, зах зээлийн орчинд уян хатан ажиллах чадвартай чбодлогын түвшинд хөгжүүлэх хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай байна. 


Төслийн менежер	64.9	54	77.3	Төслийн хэрэгжилтийг оновчтой удирдах, хугацаа, нөөц, үйл ажиллагааг уялдуулах, зорилгод чиглэсэн төлөвлөгөө, хяналтын  арга  барилд чадамжтай ч бусдыг сэдэлжүүлэх, урам өгөх тал сул байдаг. 

Хамгаалагч хэв маягийн менежер	56.9	47.9	71.6	Дүрэм журмыг баримтлах, тогтолцооны зохицуулалт хийх, эрх мэдэл, хариуцлагын тэнцвэрийг барих гэж хичээдэг. Гүйцэтгэлийн тогтвортой байдал, зохион байгуулалтад анхаардаг ч тогтвортой гүйцэтгэлийн чадвар дутагддаг. 

Стратегич менежер	58.6	44.1	75.4	 Урт хугацааны алсын хараатай төлөвлөлт, бизнесийн орчныг том зургаар харж төлөвлөдөг ч  шинэ боломж тодорхойлох, инновацын бодлогыг хэрэгжүүлэхдээ сул хандлагатай байна.

Идэвхжүүлэгч менежер	60.9	42.9 	77.5	Бусдыг идэвхжүүлэх, урам зориг өгдөг.Багийн гишүүдийг сэдэлжүүлж, эерэг уур амьсгал бүрдүүлэхэд хувь нэмэртэй манлайллын чадамжтайг илтгэх ч гэлээ нөхцөл байдлыг системтэй үнэлэж дүгнэх, аливааг том зураглалаар харж төлөвлөх чадвар сул хөгжсөн байсан. 
     
      Менежерийн хандлага чадамжыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ нь багийг удирдан зохион байгуулдаг менежерийн 7 хэв маягийг тодорхойлдог. Нийт үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан  менежерийн хэв маягийг дээрх графикаас харахад 7 хэв маягаас Төслийн хэв менежер, Идэвхжүүлэгч менежер гэсэн 2 хэв маяг зонхилсон байна.  Дээрх 7 менежерийн хэв маяг нэг менежерт бүгд өндөр байх боломжгүй, хоорондоо эсрэгцдэг шинжтэй, харин компанийн хувьд бүх хэв маяг 60%-с дээш байх тусам баг хамт олонд ашигтай гэж үздэг байна. 

3.3.1 ТӨСЛИЙН ХЭВ МАЯГИЙН МЕНЕЖЕР 

    Төслийн хэв маяг нь төлөвлөгөөтэй, зохион байгуулалттай, хариуцлагатай, зорилгод төвлөрсөн зан чанарын шинжийг илэрхийлдэг. Тэд системтэй сэтгэлгээтэй, тогтвортой гүйцэтгэлийг эрхэмлэдэг, “бодитоор хэрэгжүүлэгчид ” юм. Ажил үүргээ хүмүүсийн ур чадварынх нь дагуу хуваарлахын зэрэгцээ багийн болон төслийн үүрэг хариуцлагыг ч нарийн тооцдог.Зорилго тавьж тогтоосон хугацаандаа хүрэхийн тулд  ажил хэрэг болон багийн гишүүн нэг бүрийн ахиц дэвшлийг ажиглан дэмждэг.  \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual\


•	ТӨСЛИЙН ХЭВ МАЯГИЙН МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН  ХАНДЛАГЫН ОНООНЫ УЯЛДАА 
 
Хүснэгт 6: Төслийн менежер хэв маягийн хандлагын 4 төрлийн үзүүлэлтийн уялдаа холбооны тайлбар
 
Менежерийн хэв маяг 	Бусдыг удирдах хандлага 	Ажилдаа хандах хандлага 	Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлага 	Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлага 
Төслийн хэв маяг менежер 	Багийн гишүүдтэй хамтран ажиллахдаа найдвартай, шударга, зорилго тодорхойлох, ажил үүрэг хуваарилах чадвартай. Гэвч харилцааны уян хатан байдал, бусдын оронд өөрийгөө тавих чадвар (empathy) харьцангуй хязгаарлагдмал байх талтай учраас  мотиваци өгөх,  чадвар нь сул байх магадлалтай.  	Төслийн менежер нь  анализ хийх, нөхцөл байдлыг логиктойгоор үнэлэх, дүрэм журам, системд тулгуурлан шийдвэр гаргах чадвартай. Баримтанд тулгаарласан шийдвэр гаргалт давамгай байдаг тул аливааг бодитоор  тунгааж дүгнэх ойлголт,  өндөр байдаг.	Хариуцлагатай,өөрийн сэтгэл зүйг удирдах хяналт сайтай, ажлаа тогтвортой удирдан жолооддог.  Тэд стресс дор ч сэтгэл санааны  тэнцвэрээ алдахгүй тогтвортой шинж чанартай хүмүүс байдаг.  	Шинэчлэл, гэнэтийн өөрчлөлтөд болгоомжтой ханддаг.  Шинэ орчинд дасан зохицохдоо илүү удаан байдаг. Дасан зохицох чадвар,  төсөөлөн бодох чадвар зэрэг өөрчлөлттэй холбоотой зан чанарууд нь өндөр биш байх талтай учир  өөрчлөлтийг хүлээн авах чадвар сул байдаг. 


3.1.2.  ИДЭВХЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХЭВ МАЯГИЙН ХЭВ МАЯГ 

      Эрч хүчтэй идэвхжүүлэгчид нь багийн гишүүддээ анхаарч, хамтрагсдыг юу урамшуулж, юу идэвхжүүлж байгааг ойлгож авахыг эрмэлздэг. Өөрсдийн ажиллагсдыг үйл явцад цаг гаргахаас гадна тэдэнд тогтмол хугацаанд бүтээлч санал шүүмж өгөх замаар ажилтнуудынхаа чадавхийг хөгжүүлхэд туслах хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй байдаг. Тэд бусдыг дэмжих, урамшуулах, хүндэтгэж хандах нь баг хамт олны гүйцэтгэлд маш чухал гэж үздэг.   \Central test CTPI-үнэлгээ Technical manual\

•	ИДЭВХЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХЭВ МАЯГИЙН МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН ХАНДЛАГЫН ОНООНЫ УЯЛДАА 

Хүснэгт 7: Идэвхжүүлэгч  менежер хэв маягийн хандлагын 4 төрлийн  үзүүлэлтийн уялдаа холбооны тайлбар

Менежерийн хэв маяг 	Бусдыг удирдах хандлага 	Ажилдаа хандах хандлага 	Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлага 	Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлага 

Идэвхжүүлэгч менежер  	Идэвхжүүлэгч менежер нь бусадтай урам зоригтой харилцаж, багийг идэвхжүүлж, эерэг сэтгэл хөдлөлөөр нөлөөлөх өндөр чадамжтай. Тэд харилцааны эерэг манлайлагчид хүмүүсийн оролцоог дэмждэг, хүн бүрийг ойлгох гэж хичээдэг. Бусдын хэрэгцээг ойлгож, сэтгэл хөдлөлийг нь мэдэрч хариу үзүүлэх чадвар өндөртэй.  Үүний үндэс нь ихэвчлэн бусдыг олйгох чадвар өндөр байдгаас улбаатай байдаг. 	Тэд хүмүүсийн сэтгэл зүйг мэдэрч ойлгохдоо сайн боловч, мэдээлэлд суурилсан дүн шинжилгээ хийх, эсвэл анализд тулгуурласан  шийдвэр гаргах тал дээр дутаглдалтай байх талтай байдаг. Мэдрэмжиндээ  суурилсан шийдвэр гаргах тал давамгай байдгааё   баримтад суурилсан үнэлгээ, шийдвэр гаргах чадвар заримдаа дутмаг байх талтай. 	Энэ хэв шинжтэй менежерүүд нь итгэлтэй, өөдрөг, сэтгэл санааны уян хатан байдалтай. Тэд эерэг сэтгэлгээтэй учир аливаа бэрхшээлийг “боломж” гэж харж, эерэг энерги түгээдэг.  Гэхдээ заримдаа сэтгэл хөдлөл хэт их давамгайлах, эсвэл хэт бусдад төвлөрөөд өөрийгөө золиослох хандлагатай байх талтай юм. 	Тэд өөрчлөлтөд эерэг хандлагатай, сэтгэл хөдлөлөөр бусдыг өөрчлөлтөд уриалж чаддаг ч өөрчлөлтийн тогтвортой хэрэгжилт, системтэй шинэчлэл хийх чадвар харьцангуй сул байдаг. Энэ хэв шинжийн хүмүүс өөрчлөлтийг урам өгөх, санаачлах байдлаар эхлүүлдэг ч, дасан зохицох чадвар систем, төлөвлөлтгүй тохиолдолд үр дүн багатай байдаг . 



3.2. СЭТГЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ХЭВ МАЯГ 

       Энэ хэсэгт үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын сэтгэлгээний дөрвөн хэв маягт хэрхэн хамаарах байдлыг харьцуулна. Хамгийн тохирох хамаарал нь 100%-тай харгалзана.

Сэтгэлгээний хэв маяг нь хувь хүний мэдээлэл боловсруулах, асуудал шийдвэрлэх, шийдвэр гаргахдаа баримталдаг сэтгэлгээний хандлага, танин мэдэхүйн давуу чиглэл, логик дүгнэлтийн үндсэн хэв шинжийг тодорхойлдог сэтгэл зүйн үзүүлэлт юм.

Доор дурдсан сэтгэлгээний дөрвөн хэв маягийг CTPI-R аргачлалаар гаргасан 19 төрлийн зан чанарт үндэслэн гаргасан бөгөөд Нед Херманны Оюун ухааны давамгайлах загвар (1970) суурилаж хувь хүний аливааг ухаарч ойлгох, суралцах, асуудлыг шийдвэрлэх, шийдвэр гаргах байдалд нөлөөлдөг болохыг тодорхойлсон. 

Жич: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүн болон үзүүлэлт бүрийн дэлгэрэнгүй тайлбарыг хавсралт хэсгээс  харна уу. 

Хүснэгт 8:  Сэтгэлгээний хэв маягийн дундаж онооны тайлбар 

№	
Сэтгэлгээний хэв маяг
	
Оноо	
Дундаж онооны тайлбар

1	
Сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй 	
48.8	Шийдвэр гаргахын тулд өөрсдийн мэдрэмж, зөн совинд найдах хандлагатай байдаг ч өөрийн болон бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг мэдэрч анзаардаг ч хүний хандлагад хэт анхаарсанаас нөхцөл байдлыг бодитоор үнэлэж дүгнэхдээ алдах магадлалтай. 

2	
Дүрслэн боддог 	
45.7	Бодит байдлыг өөр өнцгөөс харж, шинэ санаа гаргах, шинэчлэл хийх чадамжтай, илүү өргөн хүрээнд харж, ирээдүйг төсөөлөх чадвартай ч шийдэл нь хэт онолд тулгуурласан бодит байдалд хэрэгжих чадамж муу байх магадлалтай. 


3	
Прагматик	
55.1	Нөхцөл байдалд тохируулан сэтгэх, хялбар шийдвэр гаргах чадвартай, үр ашиг хэрэгжилтэнд төвлөрдөг ч урт хугацааны стратеги, том зургаар харах чадвар сулрах магадлалтай. 



4	
Аналитик буюу задлан шинжлэх 	
57.9	Өгөгдөл баримтанд суурилсан шийдвэр гаргах хандлагатай. Аливаа асуудлыг логик дараалалаар ойлгож эрсдэлийг урьдчилан тооцоолох чадвартай ч хэт олон талаас шинжилсээр хугацаа алдах эрсдэлтэй. 



3.3.  АЖИЛЛАХ  ХЭВ МАЯГ 

     Энэ хэсэгт үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын ажиллах дөрвөн хэв маягт хэрхэн хамаарах байдлыг харьцуулна. Хамгийн тохирох хамаарал нь 100%-тай харгалзана.

Ажиллах  хэв маяг нь хувь хүний ажилдаа хандах хандлага, зан төлөв, ажлын орчинд өөрийгөө илэрхийлэх, нөлөөлөх, зохион байгуулах, дагаж мөрдөх, тогтвортой ажиллах зэрэгт илэрдэг үйл ажиллагааны нийтлэг төлөв байдлыг тодорхойлдог зан төлөвийн үзүүлэлт юм.

Доор дурдсан ажиллах дөрвөн хэв маягийг 19 зан чанарт үндэслэн гаргасан бөгөөд ажиллах эдгэ хэв маяг нь Уильяам Молтон Марстоны загвар (1928) үндэслэсэн. Марстоны үзэж буйгаар хувь хүмүүс нь хүрээлэн буй орчин нөхцөлөө хэрхэн ойлгон хүлээн авч буй байдал, мөн тэр орчиндоо өөрсдөд нь байгаа гэж мэдэрдэг эрх мэдлийн хэмжээнээс хамаарч өөр өөр зан төлөв гаргадаг байна.

Жич: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүн болон үзүүлэлт бүрийн дэлгэрэнгүй тайлбарыг хавсралт хэсгээс  харна уу. 

Хүснэгт 10 : Ажиллах хэв маягийн дундаж онооны тайлбар 

№	Ажиллах хэв маяг 
	Оноо 	Онооны тайлбар 

1	
Давамгайлал 	
51.2	Аливаа шийдвэрийг хурдан гаргаж, үр дүнд төвлөрөх хандлагатай ч бусдын санал бодлыг орхигдуулах магадлалтай. 


2	
Дүрэм журмыг дагах байдал 	
61.4	Дүрэм журам, стандарт, хариуцлага, системчлэлд төвлөрдөг, баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурлан шийдвэр гаргадаг ч хэтэрхий дүрэм журамд төвлөрч уян хатан байдлаа орхигдуулах эрсдэлтэй. 


3	
Нөлөөлөл	
50	Хүмүүсийг итгэлцэл, урамшуулал, сэтгэл хөдлөлөөр удирдах хандлагатай, харилцааны мэдрэмж өндөртэй ч заримдаа үр дүнгээс илүү хүмүүст төвлөрдөг. 


4	
Тууштай байдал 	
62.8 	Харилцаанд итгэлцлийг эрхэмлэдэг, баг хамт олонд итгэл даадаг ч өөрчлөлт шинчлэлтэнд хойрго ханддаг байх талтай. 



4. МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН 9 БҮЛЭГ ЧАДАМЖ, 59 УР ЧАДВАРЫН ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ 

    Энэ хэсэгт нийт үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан менежерүүдийг 9 бүлгийн 59 чадамжын онооны дунджаар ур чадамжын жагсаалтыг гаргасан болно оо. 

     Менежерийн хандлага, чадамжийн үнэлгээний менежерийн чадамж нь удирдах албан тушаалд шаардлагатай зан төлөв, ур чадвар, сэтгэлгээний хэв маяг, хариуцлага хүлээх болон бусдыг чиглүүлэх чадавхийг цогц байдлаар үнэлж, тухайн хүний удирдлагын үүрэг гүйцэтгэх тохиромж, төлөвшил, хөгжлийн хэрэгцээг тодорхойлдог сэтгэл зүйн үнэлгээний үндсэн үзүүлэлт юм.

Жич: Чадамжийн үзүүлэлт нь  бүх ажилтануудыг бүрэн төгс илэрхийлэхгүй бөгөөд тухайн үнэлгээнд хамрагдаж буй байгууллагын соёл, үйл ажиллагааны онцлог, үнэлгээнд хамрагдаж буй менежерийн салбар нэгж зэргээс хамаарч чадамжын жагсаалтанд ялгаатай байдал илэрдэг болохыг анхаарна уу. Өөрөөр хэлбэл үйл ажиллагаа, нэгжийн хариуцаж буй ажил үүргээс хамаарч тухайн чадамж өндөр нийцэлтэй,  аль эсвэл нийцэлгүй буюу хэрэгцээ шаардлага бага байж болно. 

Тайлбар: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсад тус бүрийн дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг хавсралт хэсгээс харна уу. 

•	9 бүлэг чадамжийн дундаж үзүүлэлт:

   
      CTPI тестд хамрагдагсадын 9 бүлгийн 59 чадамжийн үзүүлэлтээс хамгийн өндөр оноо авсан нь “Анализ, зүн шинжилгээ хийх чадамж” бүлэг байв. Энэхүү чадамж нь хувь хүний танин мэдэх сэтгэхүйн чадвар, шийдвэр гаргах нарийвчлал, мэдлэг олж авах, хуримтлуулах болон түгээх ур чадварыг цогцоор нь илэрхийлдэг бөгөөд дараах ур чадваруудаас бүрдэнэ:

•	Анализ хийх чадвар: Аливаа асуудлыг задлан шинжилж, үндэслэлтэй, системтэй дүгнэлт гаргах 
•	Шийдвэр гаргах чадвар: Олон хувилбараас хамгийн оновчтойг сонгож, баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурлан шийдвэр гаргах чадвар.
•	Хурдан сурах чадвар: Шинэ нөхцөл байдал, мэдлэг, мэдээлэлд дасан зохицож, богино хугацаанд ойлгох, хэрэгжүүлэх чадвар.
•	Мэдлэг туршлагаа хуваалцах чадвар: Олж авсан мэдээлэл, туршлагыг бусадтай үр дүнтэй хуваалцаж, байгууллагын хамтын суралцах соёлыг дэмжих чадвар 
•	Мэдлэг хуримтлуулах чадвар: Өөрийн мэргэжлийн хүрээнд тасралтгүй суралцах, шинэ мэдээлэл цуглуулах, түүнийг ажил хэрэгтээ хэрэглэх ур чадвар.
•	Бодолтой байх чадвар: Нөхцөл байдлыг олон өнцгөөс харж, урт хугацааны үр дагаврыг тооцон ухаалаг шийдвэр гаргах чадварыг илэрхийлдэг. 

“Анализ ба зүн шинжилгээ хийх чадамж” бүлэг өндөр үзүүлэлт гарсан нь ажилтнуудын танин мэдэхүйд суурилсан сэтгэхүй, аливааг дүгнэж хүлээж  авах чадвар, мэдлэгийн менежментийн чиг хандлага сайн төлөвшсөнийг илтгэнэ. Энэхүү давуу тал нь байгууллагын стратегийн сэтгэхүй, шийдвэр гаргалтын чанрыг хөгжүүлэхэд чухал нөлөө үзүүлдэг байна. 


МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН 9 БҮЛЭГ ЧАДАМЖ, 59 УР ЧАДВАРЫН ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН ЗАДАРГАА

Доорх хэсэгт менежерийн чадамжын 9 бүлгийн 59 чадамж тус бүрийн нарийвчилсан задаргаа, үнэлгээний үзүүлэлт нэг бүрийн үр дүн, хөгжлүүлэх боломж зөвлөмжийн хамт хүргэж байна. 

Тайлбар: Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсад тус бүрийн дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг хавсралт хэсгээс харна уу. 


•	АНАЛИЗ ДҮН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ ХИЙХ  ЧАДАМЖ-63%

Анализ дүн шинжилгээ хийх чадвар гэдэг нь хүрээлэн буй орчиноо ойлгон, тохируулан хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэхийн тулд холбогдох мэдээллийг цуглуулах, үнэлэх чадварыг хэлнэ.  

 

•	АНАЛИЗ ДҮН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ ЧАДАМЖИЙН ДУНДАЖ ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

     “Анализ ба дүн шинжилгээ хийх” бүлгийн чадамжийн оноо 63/100, буюу дүнджаас дээгүүр түвшинд байна. Энэ нь үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсад аливаа мэдээлэл, нөхцөл байдлыг задлан шинжлэх, шалтгаан-үр дагаврын холбоог таних, системтэй дүгнэлт гаргах аналитик сэтгэлгээний чадвар сайн төлөвшсөнийг илтгэнэ.Тус бүлгийн ур чадваруудаас анализ хийх чадвар, мэдлэг туршлагаа хуримтлуулах чадвар, болон бодолтой байх чадвар нь илүү хөгжсөн байна. Харин аливааг хурдан сурах, мэдлэг туршлагаа хуваалцах, болон шийдвэр гаргах чадварууд нь харьцангуй сул, хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай түвшинд байна. Эдгээр чадваруудыг тэнцвэртэйгээр хөгжүүлэх нь ажилтны танин мэдэх үйл явцын үр ашиг, бодит мэдээлэлд тулгуурласан шийдвэр гаргалт, болон багийн мэдлэгийн менежмент-ийг сайжруулахад онцгой ач холбогдолтой юм.


•	БОРЛУУЛАЛТЫН ЧАДАМЖ-47%

Үйлчлүүлэгчид нөлөөлж, ятган итгүүлж, борлуулалтын дарамт, бизнесийн боломжийг тодорхойлох замаар борлуулалтын зорилгодоо хүрэх чадварыг хэлнэ. 

 
•	БОРЛУУЛАЛТЫН ЧАДАМЖЫН ДУНДАЖ ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ

    CTPI тестийн  “Борлуулалтын чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 47/100, буюу дундаж түвшинд байна. Энэ нь борлуулалтын үйл явцын тодорхой элементүүд сайн хөгжсөн боловч хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээ, зах зээлийн боломжийг илүү нарийвчлан таних болон шинэ харилцагч татах чадварт сайжруулалт шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ. борлуулалтын үндсэн процесс буюу харилцаа тогтоох, хэлэлцээр хийх, хэрэглэгчийн итгэлийг олж авах үйл явц харьцангуй сайн хөгжсөн ч шинэ зах зээл, шинэ хэрэглэгчийн сегментэд хүрэх, хэрэглэгчийн гүн хэрэгцээ, сэтгэл зүйн хандлагыг танин мэдэх тал дээр хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатайг илэрхийлж байна. Хэрэглэгчийн хэрэгцээг ойлгох, хэрэглэгчийн санал хүсэлтийг системтэй цуглуулж, дүн шинжилгээ хийх дадал төлөвшүүлэх, шинэ хэрэглэгч татах стратегийг сайжруулах боломжуудыг эрэлхийлэхийг зөвлөж байна. 


•	ХАРИЛЦААНЫ ЧАДАМЖ 50%

Бусдыг анхааралтай сонсон, нөхцөл байдалд зохицуулж өөрийн үзэл бодол эсвэл аливаа мэдээллийг хуваалцсанаар бусдыг ойлгох мөн өөрийгөө ойлгуулах чадварыг хэлнэ. 


•	ХАРИЛЦААНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙН ДУНДАЖ ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 
   CTPI тестийн  “Харилцааны чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 50/100, буюу дунд түвшинд байна. Энэ нь хувь хүний харилцааны ур чадвар суурь түвшинд бүрэлдсэн боловч бусдад нөлөөлөх, стратегийн түвшинд харилцах, тохиролцох чадваруудыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ. Илтгэх ур чадвар, бусдад хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх чадвар нь  хувь хүн илэрхийлэх, үзэл санаагаа тодорхой хүргэх, бусдын итгэл хүлээх чадвартайг харуулж байна. Илтгэх чадвар өндөр байгаа нь олон нийтийн өмнө санаа бодлоо нээлттэй илэрхийлэх, харилцаанд идэвхтэй оролцох хандлагыг илтгэнэ. Сонсох чадвар, тохиролцол хэлцэл хийх чадвар, стратегитай харилцах болон бусдад нөлөөлөх чадварууд нь хоёр талын ойлголцолд суурилсан харилцааг бүрдүүлэх, бусдын байр суурийг анхаарах, хамтын шийдвэр гаргах чадварт нэмэлт хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатайг илэрхийлж байна. Сонсох чадварыг төлөвшүүлэх, тохиролцол, хэлэлцээр хийх ур чадварыг сайжруулах хэлэлцээрийн өмнөх мэдээлэл цуглуулах, зорилго тодорхойлох, харилцагчийн сонирхлыг ойлгох төлөвлөлтийн ур чадварыг хөгжүүлэх зэрэгт анхаарахыг зөвлөж байна. 
•	МЕНЕЖМЕНТИЙН ЧАДАМЖ 50%

Удирдах ажилтан та багаа амжилттай чиглүүлж, ажилтан тус бүрийнхээ нөөц бололцоо сэтгэл зүйн онцлогт тохируулан үүрэг даалгавуудыг оновчтой хуваарилан гүйцэтгэлийг үнэлт, баг хамт олноо зүрх сэтгэлээр нь удирдах чадварыг хэлнэ. 

 

•	МЕНЕЖМЕНТИЙН ЧАДАМЖИЙН ДУНДАЖ ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

CTPI тестийн “Менежментийн чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 50/100, буюу дунд түвшинд байна. Энэ нь удирдах ажилтнууд гүйцэтгэлд чиглэсэн, манлайллын суурь ур чадвартай боловч өөрчлөлтийг дэмжих, шийдвэр гаргах, үүрэг даалгаврыг оновчтой хуваарилах тал дээр цаашид хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ. Гүйцэтгэлийг удирдах чадвар, менторлох чадвар, манлайллын чадвар 
тухайн ажилтнууд зорилгоо тодорхойлж, багийн гүйцэтгэлийг удирдах, бусдад чиглэл өгч дэмжих, мэдлэгээ хуваалцах хандлага төлөвшсөн болохыг илтгэнэ. Харьцангуй сул оноо илэрхийлсэн үүрэг даалгаврыг оновчтой хуваарьлах чадвар, өөртөө итгэлтэй, шийдэмгий удирдах чадвар, өөрчөлтийг дэмжих чадвар нь менежментийн үйл ажиллагаанд шийдвэр гаргахдаа итгэлтэй байх, өөрчлөлтийн үеийн багийн уян хатан байдлыг хангах, даалгаврын хуваарилалт, гүйцэтгэлийн хяналтын системийг оновчтой хэрэгжүүлэх тал дээр хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатайг харуулж байна.


•	СТРАТЕГИТАЙГААР АЖЛАА ТӨЛӨВЛӨЖ, ҮНЭЛЭХ ЧАДАМЖ-55%

Ажлыг үр дүнтэй зохион байгуулж, үйлдлийнхээ үр дагаварыг урьдчилан харахын тулд хүрээлэн буй орчныг үнэлэх чадварыг хэлнэ.  


•	СТРАТЕГИТАЙГААР АЖЛАА ТӨЛӨВЛӨЖ, ҮНЭЛЭХ ЧАДАМЖИЙН ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 


     CTPI тестийн “Стратегитайгаар ажлаа төлөвлөж, үнэлэх чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 55/100, буюу дунджаас дээгүүр түвшинд байна. Энэ нь оролцогчид ажлынхаа төлөвлөлт, цагийн менежмент болон зохион байгуулалтын чадвартай боловч олон үүрэг даалгаврыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх, төсөл, хямралыг удирдах, бүтээлч сэтгэлгээг бодит үр дүнд чиглүүлэх тал дээр хөгжүүлэх нөөцтэй гэдгийг харуулж байна.  Ажлын төлөвлөгөө гаргах, зорилтоо тодорхойлох, ажлын дарааллыг оновчтой удирдах, эрсдэлийг урьдчилан тооцох чадвартай, харьцангуй бага оноо илэрсэн хямралыг удирдах чадвар, төслийг удирдах, олон үүэг даалгаврыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх чадварууд сул, ажлын ачаалал өндөр нөхцөлд нөөцөө оновчтой хуваарилах, уян хатан зохицох, олон чиг үүргийн уялдааг хянах чадварыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ.  Task prioritization болон time-blocking арга техникийг ашиглан ажлын ачааллыг оновчтой удирдах, төслийн менежментийн дижитал хэрэгслүүд (жишээ нь Trello, Notion, Asana)-ийг ашиглан ажлын уялдаа холбоог сайжруулж болно. 


ХАРИЛЦАА ХОЛБОО ТОГТООЖ УДИРДАХ ЧАДАМЖ – 48%

Бусад хүмүүстэй үр дүнтэй харилцаж, хүмүүсийн хамтын ажиллагааг дэмжин, хоорондын зөрчлийг багасгаж, баг хамт олондоо нийтийн зорилгын төлөө ажиллах боломжийг олгох чадварыг хэлнэ. 



•	ХАРИЛЦАА ХОЛБОО ТОГТООЖ УДИРДАХ УР ЧАДАМЖИЙН ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ


  CTPI  тестийн “Харилцаа холбоо тогтоож удирдах чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 48/100, буюу дундаж түвшинд байна. Багийн уур амьсгал бүрдүүлэх, маргааныг шийдвэрлэх чиглэлд давамгай байгаа ч бусдыг гүнзгий ойлгох, үр дүнтэй харилцаа тогтоох тал дээр харьцангуй сул байна. Энэ нь удирдах үүрэг гүйцэтгэхэд харилцааны уялдаа, итгэлцэл, харилцан ойлголцлын түвшинд тодорхой саад үүсгэж болзошгүй гэдгийг харуулж байна. Сонсох ур чадвараа хөгжүүлэх, идэвхтэй сонсох арга барил  ашиглан бусдын байр суурь, мэдрэмжийг ойлгох дадлыг төлөвшүүлэх замаар  харилцааны чанарыг дээшлүүлэх, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах дадал бий болгох, багийн уур амьсгалыг системтэй дэмжих, багийн уулзалт, хамтын хэлэлцүүлгийг тогтмол зохион байгуулснаар гишүүдийн урам зориг, харилцан ойлголцол нэмэгдэх болно оо. 


•	ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ ТАНЬЖ МЭДЭХ, УДИРДАХ ЧАДАМЖ-55%

Өөрийн бодол санаа, үйлдлээ урьдаар тунгаан бодож тэдгээрийг зохих ёсоор удирдах чадварыг хэлнэ. 

 


•	ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ ТАНЬЖ МЭДЭХ, УДИРДАХ  ЧАДАМЖИЙН ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ

  CTPI  тестийн “Өөрийгөө таньж мэдэх, удирдах чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 55/100, буюу дундажаас дээгүүр түвшинд байна. Хувь хүн өөрийгөө бодитоор үнэлэх, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө зохицуулах, дүрэм журамд нийцэх, өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох зэрэг чадваруудыг зохих түвшинд эзэмшиж буйг илтгэнэ. Өөрийн давуу болон сул талыг тодорхойлох, өөрийгөө бодитоор дүгнэх чадвартай ч өөрчлөлтөд хурдан зохицох чадвар харьцангуй доогуур байгаа нь шинэ нөхцөл байдал, орчны өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох, уян хатан байдлыг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлагатайг харуулж байна. 
Өөрийгөө танин мэдэх үйл явцыг гүнзгийрүүлэх зорилгоор тогтмол өөрийн үйлдэл, шийдвэрийн үр дагаврыг эргэн харж, рефлекшн хийх дадлыг бий болгох, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах чадвараа бэхжүүлэх Стрессийн үед амьсгалын дасгал, богино хугацааны завсарлага, mindfulness техник ашиглах зэргээр өөрийгөө сэтгэлзүйн хувьд тэнцвэртэй байлгах зэргийг зөвлөж байна. 

•	БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ҮНЭТ ЗҮЙЛ СОЁЛ, УУР АМЬСГАЛЫГ БҮРДҮҮЛЭХ ЧАДАМЖ- 56%

Ёс зүйтэйгээр аливаа стандарт, дүрэм журмыг даган мөрдөж, ажлын эерэг уур амьсгал орчин нөхцөлийг бий болгож хадгалж чадах чадварыг хэлнэ. 



•	БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ҮНЭТ ЗҮЙЛ СОЁЛ, УУР АМЬСГАЛЫГ БҮРДҮҮЛЭХ ЧАДАМЖИЙН ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

  CTPI  тестийн “Байгууллагын үнэт зүйл соёл, уур амьсгалыг бүрдүүлэх чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 56/100, буюу дундажаас дээгүүр түвшинд байна. Байгууллагын үнэт зүйл, соёл, хамтын уур амьсгалыг бүрдүүлэхтэй холбоотой ур чадварууд дунд түвшинд хөгжсөн. Хувь хүн байгууллагын дотоод харилцаа, хамтын ажиллагаа, ёс зүйтэй хандлагыг тодорхой хэмжээнд баримталдаг боловч зарим чиглэлд хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ.Бусдыг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх, илэн далангүй хамтран ажиллах чадвар харьцангуй тогтвортой байгаа боловч сайжруулах шаардлагатай, бусдын соёл, ялгаатай байдлыг ойлгох чадвар  болон бусдыг хүндэтгэх чадвар харьцангуй доогуур үзүүлэлттэй гарсан нь хамтын орчны харилцаанд уян хатан бус, өрөөсгөл хандлага илэрч болзошгүйг талтай байна. Харилцааны соёлыг хөгжүүлэх, бусдыг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг төлөвшүүлэх зэргээр өдөр тутмын харилцаанд эерэг үг хэллэг хэрэглэх, хамт олны гишүүдийн хувь нэмрийг үнэлэх, санал бодлыг хүндэтгэх дадлыг төлөвшүүлэхийг зөвлөж байна. 


•	АЖИЛДАА ХАНДАХ ХАНДЛАГА ОРОЛЦООГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ЧАДАМЖ- 57%

Өөрийн байгууллагаа улам сайжруулахын тулд байгууллагын зорилгод эс эсээ шингээн, сайн дураараа бүхий л зүрх сэтгэлээ зориулах чадварыг хэлнэ. 



•	АЖИЛДАА ХАНДАХ ХАНДЛАГА ОРОЛЦООГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ЧАДАМЖИЙН ОНООНЫ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

CTPI  тестийн “Ажилдаа хандах хандлага оролцоог тодорхойлох чадамж” бүлгийн дундаж оноо 57/100, буюу дундажаас дээгүүр түвшинд байна. Идэвхи оролцоотой байх чадвар, хариуцлага хүлээх чадвар 
хамгийн өндөр үзүүлэлттэй байгаа нь хувь хүн ажлын үүргээ ухамсарлаж, идэвхтэй оролцдог, хариуцлагатай ханддаг давуу талтайг харуулж байна. Чанарыг эрхэмлэх, хичээл зүтгэл гаргах, туслахад хэзээд бэлэн байх чадварууд нь ойролцоо дунд түвшинд байна. Энэ нь ажилдаа үнэнч, хамт олонд эерэг оролцоотой боловч гүйцэтгэлийн тууштай байдал болон үр дүнг тасралтгүй хангах тал дээр хөгжүүлэх боломжтой, шинэ санаа гаргах, асуудалд бүтээлчээр хандах, өөрчлөлт эхлүүлэх идэвх сул байгааг харуулж байна. Чанарыг эрхэмлэх, тууштай байдлыг дэмжих, 
ажлын гүйцэтгэлийн стандартад анхаарч, богино хугацааны зорилтыг тодорхойлох, гүйцэтгэлээ үнэлэх дадлыг бий болгох зэргээр хөгжүүлэх боломжуудыг эрэлхийлэхийг зөвлөж байна. 

59 УР ЧАДВАРЫГ  АНГИЛСАН ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ

•	Менежерийн хөгжсөн чадамжийн жагсаалт 

•	Менежерийн хөгжиж буй  чадамжын жагсаалт 


•	Менежерийн хөгжих шаардлагатай чадамжын жагсаалт 




9 бүлэг чадамжийн 59 ур чадварын үнэлгээг ангилж үзвэл: 

Ангилал	            Чадамжын тоо
Хөгжсөн 	2 чадамж
Хөгжиж буй 	32 чадамж
Хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай	25 чадамж


•	Хөгжсөн чадамжууд 2 

Энэ нь тухайн байгууллагын хүний нөөцийн сургалт, хөгжлийн бодлого нь хязгаарлагдмал хүрээнд хэрэгжиж байх магадлалтай. Ажилтнуудыг хөгжүүлэх, ажилдаа хандах хандлага, идэвх оролцооны хөтөлбөр сул байгааг харуулж байна.

•	Хөгжиж буй чадамжууд  32 

Үнэлгээннд хамрагдагсадын чадамжуудын үзүүлэлтүүд 26 нь дунд түвшинд байгаа нь богино хугацаанд сайжруулах боломжтойг харуулж байна. Энэ ангилал дахь чадамжын үзүүлэлт нэг бүрийг  сайтар хөгжүүлбэл байгууллагын нийт чадамж мэдэгдэхүйц дээшлэх боломжтой.

•	Хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай чадамжууд 25

Үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын үр дүнгээс хархад нэлээдгүй чадамжын үзүүлэлт хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай харагдах бөгөөд цаашил сургалт хөгжлийн хэрэгцээ, чадамжинд суурилсан үнэлгээ, гүйцэтгэл зэргийг уялдуулан хөгжүүлэх шаардлага өндөртэй байна.
























ТАЙЛАНГИЙН НЭГДСЭН ДҮГНЭЛТ

Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК 31 ажилтан хамрагдсан CTPI  тестийн хүрээнд байгууллагын ажилтнуудын зан чанар,  хандлага, 9 бүлгийн 59  ур чадвар, стэгэлгээний хэв маяг, ажиллах хэв маяг  тодорхойлон дүгнэлт гаргалаа. Тайлан нь ажилтнуудын давуу ба хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай талуудыг танин мэдэж,  байгууллагын хүний нөөцийн хөгжлийн бодлогод чиглэл өгөхүйц  дүгнэлт гаргалаа. Тус тестийн үр дүн нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын давуу тал, хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай чиглэлүүдийг тодорхойлох, цаашдын сургалт, хөгжлийн бодлого, манлайллын хөтөлбөр, гүйцэтгэлийн удирдлагын стратегийг оновчтой төлөвлөхөд чухал ач холбогдолтой юм. 

Ерөнхий үнэлгээний хувьд : 

•	Менежерийн чадавхийн дундаж оноо 54 буюу олон улсын сэтгэл зүйн үнэлгээний Менежерийн хандлага, ур чадварын тестэнд хамрагдсан Монгол менежерүүдиийн чадавхын дундаж оноо 50-60 хооронд хэлбэлздэг. Тус байгууллагын 54 оноо бол дундаж утгыг илэрхийлэх бөгөөд  сайн суурьтай, дунд түвшинд тогтвортой хөгжиж буй,  цаашид чадамжаа системтэйгээр нэмэгдүүлэх бүрэн боломжтой болохыг илтгэнэ.
CTPI үнэлгээний хүрээнд дөрвөн үндсэн хандлагын бүлгээр задлан шинжилгээ хийж, байгууллагын нийтлэг онцлогийг дараах байдлаар тодорхойллоо.

1.	Өөрийгөө удирдах хандлага: Ажлын төлөө тууштай байдал, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах, өөрийгөө бодитоор үнэлэх ур чадварууд харьцангуй өндөр үнэлэгдсэн. Энэ нь хувь хүн өөрийн үйлдэл, шийдвэрийг ухамсарлаж, хариуцлагатай, дотоод сэдэлтэй ажилладаг болохыг харуулж байна.
2.	Ажилдаа хандах хандлага: “Баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурлан шийдвэр гаргах” хууль дүрэм журмыг сахидаг нь дундаж түвшинд байна.  Гэвч зохион байгуулалттай тууштай чанар нь сул бүтээлч шийдэл санал болгох хандлагыг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлагатайг харуулж байна.
3.	Бусдыг удирдах хандлага: Энэ бүлэгт итгэл хүлээлгэ, бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг чанар давамгай гарч, байгууллагын дотоод соёлд итгэлцэл, ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг хандлагыг илтгэж байна. Харин өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай, хяналт  тавьдаг зэрэг чадварууд харьцангуй доогуур байгаа нь харилцааны уян хатан байдлыг хөгжүүлэх, ажлын гүйцэтгэлд анхаарах, шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ.
4.	Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах хандлага: Шинэ санаа турших, алсын хараатай сэтгэх, зөн совинтой шийдвэр гаргах чиглэлд эерэг үнэлгээ гарсан ч өөрчлөлтөд хурдан зохицох, уян хатан хандлага төлөвшүүлэх тал дээр анхаарах хэрэгцээ илэрч байна.

Сэтгэлгээ, ажлын хэв маягийн онцлог нь аналитик буюу задлан шинжлэх хандлагатай, өгөгдөл, баримтад суурилан шийдвэр гаргадаг, эрсдэлийг урьдчилан тооцоолдог онцлогтой байна. Энэ нь логик, дэс дараалалтай бодох, нарийн шинжилгээ хийх давуу талтай хэдий ч хэт олон талаас дүгнэх улмаас шийдвэр гаргалтын хурд саарах эрсдэлтэй байна.
Ажлын хэв маягийн хувьд тууштай, тогтвортой, итгэлцлийг эрхэмлэдэг, баг хамт олны оролцоонд тулгуурладаг боловч шинэчлэл, өөрчлөлтөд хойрго хандах хандлага ажиглагдаж байна.



•	Сайн хөгжсөн ур чадвар: 2
•	Хөгжиж буй ур чадвар: 32
•	Хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай ур чадвар: 25
Хамгийн доогуур үнэлгээтэй чадварууд нь:
•	Олон үүрэг даалгаврыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх чадвар
•	Бусдыг хүндэтгэх чадвар
•	Санаачлагатай байх чадвар
Эдгээр нь төлөвлөгөөт сургалт, дасгалжуулалт, урамшууллын бодлогоор дэмжих шаардлагатай хөгжлийн чиглэлүүд юм.

Тус байгууллагын ажилтнуудын менежерийн чадамж дунд түвшинд, тогтвортой бөгөөд хөгжлийн өндөр нөөцтэй байгааг CTPI тестийн үр дүн харуулж байна.
Хандлагын түвшинд өөрийгөө удирдах, хариуцлагатай байх зэрэг нь хүчтэй илэрч байгаагаас  байгууллагын соёлд итгэлцэл, тогтвортой байдал давамгай байгааг илтгэнэ. Харин санаачилга, өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох, харилцаанд уян хатан байх чиглэлд нэмэлт хөгжлийн хэрэгцээ байгаа бөгөөд цаашдын сургалт, хөгжлийн бодлого нь бүтээлч сэтгэлгээг дэмжих, удирдах ур чадварыг гүнзгийрүүлэх, өөрчлөлтөд хурдан дасан зохицох, олон үүрэг даалгаврыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх  чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх чиглэлд төвлөрөх нь зүйтэй юм.  

Хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай чиглэлүүд 	Сургалт хөгжлийн хэрэгцээ зорилго 	Хүлээгдэж буй үр дүн 
Өөрчлөлтөд хурдан дасан зохицох чадвар
Стрессийн үед шийдвэр гаргах уян хатан байдал	Стресс менежмент
Adaptive mindset ба resilience сургалт	Сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдал дээшилж, ажлын гүйцэтгэл тогтвортой болно
Бусдын ялгаатай байдлыг ойлгох чадвар
Бусдыг хүндэтгэх хандлага	Cultural competence & inclusion сургалт
Эерэг харилцаа, багийн итгэлцэл хөгжүүлэх сургалт	Хамтын ажиллагаа сайжирч, байгууллагын уур амьсгал эерэг болно
Санаачилгатай байх чадвар
Тууштай хичээл зүтгэл гаргах	Innovation & creative problem solving сургалт
Motivation & personal effectiveness коучинг	Бүтээлч санаачилга, ажлын урам зориг нэмэгдэнэ. 
Санаачилга, өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох чадвар	Бүтээлч сэтгэлгээ, соёлын мэдрэмж, лидерийн хөгжлийн нэгдсэн сургалт	Хувийн манлайлал, хамтын инновацийн чадавх сайжирна








Сургалтын чиглэл 	Шалтгаан 
Харилцаа, ятгалга, хэлцэл хийх ур чадвар 	Байгууллагад үр дүнтэй харилцаа, ятгах ур чадвар болон хэлцэл хийх чадвар нь хамтын ажиллагаа, бизнесийн түншлэл, болон дотоод ба гадаад харилцаанд зайлшгүй хэрэгтэй. Энэ чадвар дутмаг тохиолдолд үл ойлголцол, маргаан, боломж алдах эрсдэл нэмэгддэг. 
Стратегитай харилцах чадвар  	Стратегитэй өөртөө итгэлтэй ажилтан бол байгууллагын өсөлт хөгжилд гол хөдөлгөгч хүч. Энэ ур чадвар сул болвол хүлээлтэд нийцэхгүй, шийдвэр гаргалт удааширдаг. 
Олон үүрэг даалгаварыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх 	Multitasking буюу олон даалгаврыг зэрэг гүйцэтгэх чадвар нь хурд, цагийн менежмент, стрессийн тэсвэртэй байдлыг шаарддаг. Энэ чадвар сул болвол үр ашиг буурч, чанар алдагдах магадлалтай. 
Өөрчлөлтийг дэмжих чадвар 	Өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох, шинэ санаачлагыг хүлээн зөвшөөрч дэмжих чадвар нь байгууллагын инноваци, өрсөлдөх чадварт нэн чухал. Хэрэв энэ чадвар хөгжөөгүй бол ажилтан эсэргүүцэл үзүүлж, шинэчлэлийн явц удааширдаг. 
 
ETIX is an assessment designed to objectively analyse an individual’s attitudes towards counterproductive work behaviour. It aims to identify those who are inclined to accept and participate in certain behaviours that may not be in the company’s best interests. These behaviours may be detrimental for the company with regards to both physical property and the psychological impact on those at the receiving end of such behaviours.

ETIX consists of 140 questions displaying various counterproductive work behaviours which are related to six factors, each representing a different aspect of work ethics: Respect for Equality, Respect for Laws and Procedures, Respect for Commitments, Respect for Other People, Respect for Facts and Honesty, and Respect for Equality. The aim of this assessment is to evaluate a person’s tolerance towards, and likelihood of engaging in, unethical work behaviour. It can aid decision-makers when recruiting by optimising candidate fit. The assessment was also developed with the aim of helping organisations to approach the subject of work ethics with their employees or candidates; in this way, they will be able to explore and develop the individual in question’s ethics and thereby ensure an alignment between individual and organisational behaviour expectations.

This user guide and manual will help the test user understand the theoretical foundations behind ETIX, how each factor is defined in organisational contexts, and the manner in which the test has evolved into its current structure. It will also serve as a guide to better understand the stages of test administration, report interpretation, and applications of the test in a range of organisational settings.
 
1.	General Description and Applicability
ETIX provides an analysis of a person’s likelihood to engage in unethical work behaviour by measuring their attitudes towards, and tolerance of, various counterproductive work behaviours. It analyses six factors related to work ethics that are relevant in assessing a person’s general propensity towards ethical work behaviour. The analysis of each factor is divided into attitudes towards other people’s behaviour and attitudes towards one’s own behaviour. This is relevant in measuring an overall work ethic because:

By assessing an individual’s attitudes towards other people’s behaviour, we can assess their likelihood of accepting unethical work behaviour in others. Those who accept unethical work behaviours in others help to maintain an unproductive work environment.

By assessing attitudes towards one’s own behaviour, we can closely evaluate their level of acceptance of unethical work behaviour in their own actions and, therefore, their likelihood of taking part in behaviours that contribute to an unproductive work environment.

The combination of these two facets in each factor provides a more precise and accurate evaluation of a person’s likelihood of engaging in counterproductive work behaviour.
ETIX measures the following 6 factors and 12 facets:

Respect for Commitments

This factor measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting commitments. It aims to evaluate people’s level of acceptance of behaviours related to people’s lack of commitment to their work.

Self: this facet measures an individual’s respect for work commitments. It evaluates the tendency to adhere to work commitments, to be trustworthy, and to be reliable.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards other people’s level of respect for commitments of work. It evaluates the tendency to feel uncomfortable with people who do not uphold their commitments and to show disapproval of such actions

Respect for Goods and Property

This factor measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting the goods and property of a company. It aims to measure a person’s level of acceptance, and therefore likelihood, of committing petty theft.

Self: this facet measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting goods and property. It evaluates the likelihood of engaging in the act of stealing of any kind.

Others: this facet measures an individual’s attitudes towards other people respecting the goods and property of a company. It evaluates the tendency to believe that stealing money, products, services, or office supplies is unacceptable.

Respect for Laws and Procedures

This factor measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting laws and procedures meant to protect organisational interests. It aims to measure a person’s level of acceptance of corrupt behaviour.
 
Self: this facet measures an individual’s respect for laws and procedures. It assesses the likelihood of initiating or even participating in the bending of rules to meet self-interested goals.

Others: this facet measures the tendency to be attached to the concept of legality, believing in the virtues and importance of the law above self-interest. It assesses the tendency to reject other people bending the rules to pursue self-interested goals.

Respect for Facts and Honesty

This factor aims to measure attitudes towards respecting facts and honesty. It aims to measure both individuals’ level of acceptance of the manipulation of information and their likelihood of engaging in deceitful behaviour.

Self: this facet evaluates the tendency to respect facts and honesty and to believe information must be reported in a factual and honest manner. It measures the tendency to be truthful.

Others: this facet evaluates attitudes toward other people respecting facts and honesty. It evaluates the tendency to find manipulation unacceptable and to not tolerate other people lying or engaging in deceitful behaviour.

Respect for Equality

This factor measures attitudes towards respecting equality. It aims to measure the level of acceptance and likelihood of committing acts of discrimination in the workplace.

Self: this facet measures the tendency to respect equality. It measures the tendency to treat everyone fairly and to acknowledge people based on their professional accomplishments rather than on irrelevant personal or physical characteristics.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards other people respecting equality. It evaluates the tendency to feel uncomfortable when faced with acts of discrimination and to report such behaviour.

Respect for Other People

This factor measures attitudes towards respecting people at work. It aims to measure people’s level of acceptance of inappropriate or offensive work behaviour, which can lead to accepting and participating in bullying and harassment.

Self: this facet measures the level of respect for others at work. It evaluates the tendency to reject initiating or participating in any offensive or degrading behaviour towards other people and the tendency to remain courteous and respectful to co-workers.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards individuals respecting other people at work. It evaluates the tendency to feel uncomfortable working in environments where people are not valued, and where harassment or bullying can take place.
 
1.1.	Main Areas of Application
The aim of ETIX is to evaluate a person’s tolerance of unethical work behaviour and their likelihood of engaging in it. It is intended for use by Human Resources professionals in the selection and development of employees.

The assessment can also be used to identify those with a high proclivity to engage in behaviours that are deemed counterproductive and who could therefore cause damage to the company.

Applications of ETIX can vary, as it is suitable for individuals, teams, and organisational assessment. It can be applied to employee recruitment, selection, and development processes, as well as for team and individual development, and for culture and employee commitment audits.


1.2.	Questionnaire Structure
ETIX consists of 6 core factors which are divided into two facets, one measuring attitudes towards one’s own behaviour (facet Self), and the other measuring attitudes towards other people’s behaviour (facet Others). There is an additional factor that serves as a social desirability scale, which is also divided into the two facets Self and Others. The final version of the questionnaire comprises of 140 questions. Each factor contains 20 questions; 10 questions are related to the facet Self and the other 10 are related to the facet Others. All questions are measured on a 4-point Likert scale, where respondents need to specify their level of agreement or disagreement with each item (1= Strongly agree, 2= Somewhat agree, 3= Somewhat disagree, 4= Strongly disagree). This is the most common form of scoring in normative questionnaires and covers the full range of possible responses.


1.3.	Mode of Administration, Languages and Special Requirements
ETIX is administered online and is compatible with all computer systems including Windows, MAC-OS, and Linux. The assessment can be administered remotely and without supervision. Reports are solely generated online; therefore, if the test has been administered on paper, the administrator must manually enter candidates’ responses into the Central Test client platform to generate a report.

The questionnaire is available in English, Spanish, and French. For more information on language availability, please contact the Central Test Consulting Service at consulting@centraltest.com.

ETIX was designed to be used by individuals from diverse backgrounds and can be adapted for those with special needs. It is possible to adjust visual screen specifications, such as increasing the font size and screen display. Test instructions are accessible throughout the duration of the assessment for those who require it. Questions can be revisited and changed as desired. For candidates who are blind or have severe visual impairments, items can be read aloud by a trained administrator.

The average time for completion is 20 minutes; however, ETIX does not have a time limit and therefore candidates who need more time to answer the questions can do so freely. Please contact the test publisher for guidance on administering the questionnaire to individuals or groups with special requirements.
 
1.4.	Social Desirability
People are sociable by nature and so are inclined to seek social acceptance. Social desirability is the tendency to present oneself in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others. An individual’s need to present themselves in a favourable light negatively impacts test results (Dodou & de Winter, 2014); therefore, it is of utmost importance to control for social desirability in respondents. This is especially true for recruitment purposes, as a candidate will be highly tempted to answer in a way that will impress the recruiter.

In order to control for social desirability, a social desirability scale was constructed for ETIX. The questions pertaining to the social desirability scale were similar to the other test items in terms of vocabulary and subject; this was done to ensure they were not easily detected. The scale is composed of 20 questions and is equally split between the facets Self and Other.


1.5.	Test-taker Requirements and Recommendations
ETIX was designed for members of the general population over 20 years of age that are currently working or looking for work. It is recommended that candidates receive notification of the objective of the assessment, the conditions it will be administered in, how data will be handled and stored, and how the feedback will be delivered. Potential candidates should also be asked beforehand whether they have any special needs or requirements.


1.6.	Administrator Qualifications and Recommendations
In order to administer ETIX, practitioners must complete a standardised training course and/or possess accredited testing qualifications.

The aim of the training is to ensure that the test user knows how to:

-	Administer the assessment in standardised conditions
-	Interpret scores and norms
-	Generate written and verbal feedback from the results
-	Match the results to a range of organisational needs

Prior to any administration, it is recommended that administrators take ETIX themselves. This will enable them to become familiar with it.

Test administration must be in accordance with the organisation’s code of practice and legal regulations on the use of psychometric assessments for employment purposes. It is recommended that international and country laws, such as data protection, discrimination, race and ethnicity relations etc., are taken into account prior to administration. This is to help ensure that the test administration is objective and fair.

Additionally, prior to use, administrators must be familiar with, and adhere to, Central Test’s conditions of use, Code of Ethics, and Quality Charter. Administrators must ensure that:

•	The appropriate test(s) has been chosen to meet the organisational needs
•	The candidate is informed about the assessment and its purpose prior to administration
•	The candidate has given consent prior to administration
 
•	Appropriate norms are used to interpret results
•	The candidate is given feedback on the results
•	The results and personal information will be deleted on request by the candidate
•	The candidate has given consent prior to personal data or results being transferred to third parties
•	Only qualified personnel administer assessments and have access to the data
•	Assessment materials and reports are stored securely
For more information about Central Test’s Code of Ethics, refer to Central Test’s Quality Charter.

1.6.1.	Testing Conditions

ETIX should be administered in a quiet, well-lit, and ventilated environment, so as to ensure that the candidate is undistracted and has a pleasant experience, thereby increasing the probability that their responses are accurate. Candidates should be allowed sufficient time to take the assessment and should thus be informed about the length of the questionnaire prior to administration. It is best to refer to the assessment as a questionnaire and not a test to reduce candidates’ anxiety levels.

Prior to testing, administrators should ensure that all relevant candidate background information has been collected and verify that the correct candidate is taking the assessment. Candidates receive an email invitation to take the questionnaire, with an embedded link and login details. All web links and login details are unique to a candidate’s account. Expiration dates can be set in order to ensure candidates complete the questionnaire within a specific timeframe.

ETIX does not have a time restriction; however, time is monitored to allow administrators to know whether a candidate has taken an overly long or short time to complete the questionnaire. Candidates are encouraged to answer questions quickly and spontaneously, in order to provide more accurate answers.


1.7.	Technical and Security Issues
The following points serve as guidelines for securely administering ETIX. These are useful for ensuring that ETIX is administered in an objective and fair manner. Security specifications are also important for protecting the candidate’s information, both during administration and after the completion of the assessment.

1.7.1.	Respecting the Ethical Charter

As a publisher of online assessment tools, Central Test respects the legal conventions of French labour law and the regulatory provisions resulting from the law of 6 January 1978 pertaining to information technology, files and freedoms: Declaration N°1834067.

Test results and personal data cannot be shared with third parties without explicit consent from the candidate. Candidates have the right to access their results and the assessor must grant them access when requested. Furthermore, if the candidate requests it, all data must be permanently deleted; to do so the candidate must contact either the organisation or Central Test directly.
 
1.7.2.	Confidentiality and Security

Central Test guarantees the security and confidentiality of data generated during the administration of online tests: access codes are encrypted in the database and cannot be accessed by anyone. Passwords are computationally generated and not visible to companies. A URL rewriting module (secure link generator) has been installed and has transparent parameter passing for the user.

Browsing and data exchanged via the Central Test application can be secured and represented by an icon in the form of a padlock in the internet browser. The Central Test application has a <<GeoTrust SSL TRUE BusinessID>> digital signature, issued and certified by GeoTrust®. This certificate protects all Central Test assessments from phishing attacks and serves as proof of our dedication to providing a secure platform.

Invitations to take tests are made via secured links that are of limited use (in terms of numbers and duration). The tests are timed, and IP addresses are tracked.

1.7.3.	Hardware Architecture and Server Availability

Central Test has a network of ten servers to provide high-quality service. Each server is housed in a specialised data centre featuring:

•	Dedicated lines
•	A guaranteed bandwidth of 100Mbps (per server)
•	Redundant energy sources
•	4-hour Equipment Restoration time
•	2-hour Incident Intervention time
•	Monitoring and assistance 24/7/365
Access to the server administration is restricted to an IP address and is password-secured. Data exchanges are secure. Central Test’s application has been tested on and is compatible with the following browsers: Internet Explorer 8 or newer, Firefox 21 or newer, Google Chrome 30 or newer, and Safari 7 or newer.


1.8.	Supply, Conditions, and Availability
Conditions of supply and availability vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply training is compulsory prior to use and distribution; ETIX can be ordered online or by contacting any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide. The same applies for information about prices and related products and services.
 
2.	Conceptual and Practical Scale Development
2.1.	The History and Value of Integrity Testing to Personnel Assessment

Employee behaviour at work has always been a matter of concern for organisations because it can heavily impact on productivity and success. Some employees’ actions, such as loyalty to the organisation (Khuong & Tien, 2013), sharing and taking pride in the organisation’s vision, taking responsibility, and being concerned about the organisation’s growth (Kular, Gatenby, Rees, Soane, & Truss, 2008) benefit employers. These productive work behaviours help establish a good rapport between the employee and the employer, resulting in optimal work performance and lower turnover (Shore & Martin, 1989).

On the other hand, certain employee behaviours may cause harm to the organisation. Workplace behaviours that are obstructive rather than constructive, and have a negative impact within an organisational environment, are termed counterproductive work behaviours (CWB) (Barrett, 2001). These behaviours can unintentionally harm co-workers, employers, and/or the organisation (Thomas, 2012). They can range from minor forms of counterproductive work behaviour, such as taking excessive breaks, leaving early, and intentionally working slowly, to more serious forms, such as sabotage and stealing (Thomas, 2012).

Measuring Work Ethics in various organisational psychology domains, such as leadership (Hooijberg, Lane, & Diversé, 2010), employee wellness, and employee selection (Ones, Viswesvaran, & Schmidt, 1993), has attracted a lot of attention due to the damage that a poor work ethic can cause for a company.

Several studies estimated that CWB's cost organisations billions of dollars annually (Camara & Schneider, 1994; Murphy, 1993; Vardi & Weitz, 2004, as cited in Berry, Carpenter & Barratt, 2012). Yet CWBs do not only damage organisations financially and materially; they also cause a loss of resources. For instance, employees who are the target of CWBs can experience decreased job satisfaction, increased stress, and consequently an increased intention to quit (Budd, Arvey, & Lawless, 1996; Glomb, 2002).

Research on deviant employee activity has found that up to 80% of employees steal from their employers (Boye & Slora, 1993). In fact, CWBs may be responsible for more than $41.65 billion in annual damages for the retail industry alone (The Global Retail Theft Barometer, 2011). Furthermore, The Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE, 2004) states that a typical U.S. firm loses about 6% of its annual revenues due to deviant behaviour such as employee fraud, and the ACFE estimated that businesses globally suffer an annual loss of $2.9 trillion as a result of fraudulent activity (Moore et al., 2012).

While a great deal of research has recently been devoted to the measurement and prediction of CWBs, before the 1980s “integrity” or “honesty” tests were only used by a select few (Berry, Ones & Sackett, 2007; Barrett, 2001). Those who did use them were typically security companies or specialised consultants, who used them in combination with the polygraph (Barrett, 2001). In 1988, the Employee Polygraph Protection Act (1988) rendered the use of the polygraph illegal for most employers in the USA. As a result, developing an alternative way to predict employee dishonesty and lack of integrity became a major concern for organisational psychologists.

There are two types of integrity tests that are generally accepted by experts: overt integrity tests and personality-orientated integrity tests (Sackett & Wanek, 1996).
 
Overt Integrity Tests

These tests ask direct questions regarding a test taker’s attitudes or past behaviours. They typically consist of two sections:

-	The first measures attitude and includes questions about beliefs concerning the frequency and extent of unethical behaviours, attitudes about punishing those behaviours, endorsement of rationalisations for those behaviours, and remorse for past actions (Berry, Ones & Sackett, 2007).

-	The second section asks the candidate to describe the amount of theft and counterproductive behaviours they might have engaged in while with other employers (e.g., how often an individual has engaged in theft, drug use, criminal behaviour, or other wrongdoings).

Personality-oriented Tests

These tests are more covert as they assess personality constructs believed to be related to integrity. They may ask questions to assess individuals’ thrill-seeking behaviours, social conformity, attitudes towards authority, aggression, emotional stability, agreeableness, conscientiousness, and dependability. Questions are phrased similarly to those on personality tests (Berry, Ones & Sackett, 2007).

Research has generally found that both types of integrity tests (overt and personality-type) are good predictors of CWBs (Berry, Ones & Sackett, 2007). A meta-analysis by Ones, Viswesvaran and Schmidt (1993) found that an overt test predicted a composite variable of CWBs consisting of disciplinary problems, tardiness, absenteeism, turnover, violence, substance abuse, property damage, and organisational rule breaking (ρ=.39) as well as a relationship between integrity tests and theft behaviours. However, personality-orientated measures predicted CWBs slightly less (ρ=.29) than overt tests.

In addition to predicting various CWBs, integrity tests are among the best predictors of overall job performance (ρ= .41). Schmidt and Hunter (1998) found that integrity tests add more incremental validity to cognitive ability in predicting job performance than any other personnel selection tool. The two combined produce a large validity estimate (ρ= .65) (Berry, Ones & Sackett, 2007).

In recent years, the definition of work ethics has broadened from the relatively narrow concept of theft, lying, and cheating to a range of behaviours, attitudes, and dispositions considered “not conducive to efficient and effective work practices” or counterproductive to organisational health (Barrett, 2001). Now a days, work ethics assessments are usually referred to as measuring “employee reliability” (Sackett & Harris, 1985; Hogan & Hogan, 1989) and “counter-productive behaviour” (Hollinger, 1986). These tests help detect obstructive rather than constructive organisational work practices that have a negative impact within the organisational environment (Barrett, 2001). They are designed to help employers identify job applicants who are relatively likely to commit certain undesirable behaviours, including but not limited to stealing.


2.2.	Theoretical Background
As a result of the damage caused by CWBs, there has been extensive research into the factors that lead employees to behave in a counterproductive manner.

Studies show a relationship between some personality traits and counterproductive work behaviours. Salgado (2002) found that an individual’s level of conscientiousness could be used to predict how likely
 
they would be to participate in or to accept deviant behaviours. Furthermore, the traits Neuroticism and Openness from the Five Factor Model (McCrae & Costa, 1987) have been found to be linked positively, while Agreeableness and Extraversion linked negatively to a higher likelihood of engaging in CWBs (Nurul, Kozako, Safin & Rahim, 2013).

Other studies have shown that CWBs are related to other personality traits, including narcissism and a generally negative disposition (Penny & Spector, 2002). Moreover, unclear job descriptions, employment insecurity, inappropriate appraisal systems, and a lack of internal career opportunities have also been found to relate to CWBs (Al-Shuaibi, Subramaniam, & Shamsudin, 2014).

Research into CWBs also suggests that the theory of moral disengagement, which is an extension of Albert Bandura’s more general social cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986), could be used to explain why people engage in such behaviours at work (Moore, Detert, Treviño, Baker & Mayer, 2012). According to social cognitive theory, when self-regulatory capabilities are working properly, transgressive behaviour is deterred through self-condemnation (Bandura, 1986). In other words, individuals anticipate that they will suffer if they engage in behaviour that conflicts with their internalised moral standards. Moral disengagement theory explains how this self-regulatory process can fail when moral disengagement mechanisms disable the cognitive links between transgressive behaviour and the self- sanctioning that should prevent it (Bandura 1986, 1999, 2002).

The moral disengagement process is theorised to play an important role in explaining how individuals are able to engage in corporate wrongdoing and corruption, without apparent cognitive distress (Bandura, Caprara, & Zsolnai, 2000; Brief, Buttram, & Dukerich, 2001).
According to Moore et al. (2012), moral disengagement occurs through a set of eight interrelated cognitive mechanisms that facilitate unethical behaviour:

-	Moral justification (reframing unethical acts as being for the greater good)
-	Euphemistic labelling (making harmful actions appear benign with positive language)
-	Advantageous comparison (comparing behaviour with more reprehensible ones)
-	Displacement of responsibility (blaming authority figures)
-	Diffusion of responsibility (blaming the group)
-	Distortion of consequences (construing it as a victimless crime, e.g. crimes against large companies)
-	Dehumanisation (framing victims as underserving of basic human considerations)
-	Attribution of blame (victim-blaming, e.g. thinking that the victims deserve it or were looking for it)

These serve to cognitively restructure unethical acts so that they appear less harmful. As a result, an individual is free to engage in behaviours that are damaging to the organisation either through causing material damage or hurting employees in a way that will reduce their effectiveness (Moore et al., 2012).

Others also view CWBs as a cognition-based response to experienced injustice (Skarlicki & Folger, 1997; Skarlicki, Folger, & Tesluk, 1999; Fox, Spector, & Miles, 2001). Employees may respond to perceptions of unfair treatment with negative emotions, such as anger, outrage, and resentment (Folger, 1993), desire for retribution, and a range of direct and indirect behavioural responses called Organisational Retaliatory Behaviour (ORB), such as theft (Greenberg, 1990), vandalism, sabotage, withdrawal, and resistance (Jermier, Knights, & Nord, 1994).

From the literature reviewed above, it is to be understood that an accurate way to measure a person’s likelihood of engaging in CWBs is to measure their attitudes and beliefs about unethical behaviour
 
when activating the different cognitive mechanisms of moral disengagement. This perspective was taken into account when developing the ETIX items.

Furthermore, research demonstrates that attitudes and subjective norms are strong predictors of behavioural intentions of various organisational misbehaviours and CWBs, such as time theft, absenteeism, tardiness, theft, and drug use (Vardi and Weitz, 2002; Kamps and Brooks, 1991; Henle et al, 2010). This further confirms the relevance of measuring attitudes in order to predict behaviour.

CWBs have been conceptualised in a number of ways, most commonly as encompassing theft, honesty, violation of policies, reliability, dependability, manipulation (IMI, Integrity Measuring Instrument), organisational aggression (Neuman & Baron, 1998; Fox & Spector, 1999), antisocial behaviour (Giacalone & Greenberg, 1997), delinquency (Hogan & Hogan, 1989), deviance (Hollinger, 1986; Robinson & Bennett, 1995), retaliation (Skarlicki & Folger, 1997), revenge (Bies, Tripp, & Kramer, 1997), mobbing/bullying, sexual harassment, and computer misuse (Knorz & Zapf, 1996). These concepts were all taken into account when developing the ETIX dimensions.


2.3.	Development of ETIX
ETIX was developed in a comprehensive and scientific manner. The development of the test started in 2014, as a result of accrued demand from psychometric assessment users whose companies suffered damages due to employee counterproductive work behaviour. Extensive empirical and theoretical research was conducted to create ETIX dimensions and items. The questionnaire was pretested several times to ensure that it met the criteria for reliability and validity established by internationally recognised psychological institutions (ITC, BPS, APA). Special attention was given to the measurement of Social Desirability, in order to ensure effective detection of faking, and to the creation of subtle and realistic items.

2.3.1.	The Survey

As ETIX sprang from an increasing demand for this type of assessment, a survey was conducted with Central Test’s users from 111 different companies across 35 countries and in three languages (English, French, and Spanish). The participants were HR professionals from large corporations across a variety of sectors. Participants were contacted by phone and asked to complete a short survey online consisting of 29 questions. The aim of the survey was to:

-	Establish the level of interest for a psychometric assessment evaluating work ethics
-	Establish the level of damage companies suffer as a result of employees’ CWB
-	Establish the level of concern over five large dimensions related to ETIX: theft, corruption, lying and manipulating information, discrimination and bullying, and lack of commitment to one’s company

The results portray that 81% of respondents considered companies to suffer a high amount of damage due to employees’ lack of work ethics (100% for Spanish, 85% for English, and 65% for French). Furthermore, 81% of respondents stated that they would use a test which specifically measured work ethics. The five dimensions measured were rated as either being a concern or a high concern by the vast majority of respondents.

The results of this survey were used to help develop the dimensions of ETIX and to confirm the relevance of developing the test.
 
2.3.2.	ISO norm 26000

To ensure that the factors within ETIX are internationally recognised and relevant, the ISO norm 26000 on Social Responsibility was referenced.

The ISO norm 26000 provides guidance for all types of organisations, regardless of their size or location, on how they can operate in a socially responsible way, which constitutes acting in an ethical and transparent manner and contributing to the health and welfare of society.

The ISO norm 26000 encompasses the following seven norms of social responsibility:

-	Accountability: an organisation should be accountable for its impact on society.
-	Transparency: an organisation should be transparent in its decisions and activities which impact on society and the environment.
-	Ethical Behaviour: an organisation should behave ethically; an organisation's behaviour should be based on the values of honesty, equity and integrity.
-	Respect for Stakeholders’ Interests: an organisation should respect, consider, and respond to the interests of its stakeholders
-	Respect for the Rules of Law: an organisation should accept that respect for the rule of law is mandatory. The rule of law refers to the supremacy of law and, in particular, to the idea that no individual or organisation stands above the law and that government is also subject to the law.
-	Respect for International Norms of Behaviour: an organisation should respect international norms of behaviour, while adhering to the principle of respect for the rule of law.
-	Respect for Human Rights: an organisation should respect human rights and recognise both their importance and their universality.
The final 6 factors of ETIX are all present in the ISO norm 26000; this establishes ETIX as a tool that measures universally recognised factors relevant to companies aspiring to be socially responsible.

2.3.3.	Ethics charters

To further demonstrate the relevance of ETIX’s factors, ethics charters from the following 12 large multinational companies were reviewed: L'Oréal (2007), EE (2010), Carrefour (2010), Optorg (2012),
Vinci (2014), Sunat, Eurotunnel (2013), Air France KLM (2010), Molex (2007), Sanofi (2013), SNC
Lavalin (2015) and Steria (2008).

This review yielded the below reoccurring rules of conduct, which have been grouped into clusters. Each ETIX factor relates to one cluster, which confirms the relevance of ETIX for organisations worldwide.

1st Cluster (Corresponding ETIX factor: Respect for Equality)

-	Rejection of discrimination
-	Respect for diversity
-	Respect for equality

2nd Cluster (Corresponding ETIX factor: Respect for Other People)

-	Respect for human rights and dignity
-	Rejection of sexual or moral harassment
 
-	Rejection of violence and aggression
-	Respect for security and hygiene

3rd Cluster (Corresponding ETIX factor: Respect for Goods and Property)

-	Respect for company property
-	Lawful use of company property/resources
-	Rejection of theft

4th Cluster (Corresponding ETIX factor: Respect for Commitments)

-	Respect for the quality of products/work
-	Appropriate use of work computer
-	Rejection of drugs and alcohol use
-	Respect for the environment

5th Cluster (Corresponding ETIX factor: Respect for Laws and Procedures)

-	Rejection of corruption
-	Lawfulness
-	Rejection of conflicts of interest
-	Rejection of abuse of power
-	Rejection of bribery

6th Cluster (Corresponding ETIX factor: Respect for Facts and Honesty)

-	Rejection of the manipulation of information
-	Transparency
-	Protection and lawful use of data
-	Authenticity and honesty
-	Appropriate use of information

2.3.4.	Description of Factors

ETIX encompasses a total of six factors, each measuring an aspect of counterproductive work behaviour. Every factor has two facets, ‘Self’ and ‘Others’. The facet ‘Self’ measures an individual’s attitude towards their behaviour at work, while the facet ‘Others’ measures an individual’s attitude towards other people’s counterproductive work behaviour. The six factors and facets are defined as:

Respect for Goods and Property

This factor measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting the goods and property of a company. It aims to measure a person’s level of acceptance of petty theft and to identify those who respect the boundaries between what belongs to them and what belongs to the company under all circumstances.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards another people’s behaviour.

A person with a high score on this facet shows positive attitudes towards other people respecting the goods and property of a company. They are likely to believe that stealing money, products, services, or office supplies is unacceptable and that such behaviours should be reported and sanctioned.
 
On the other hand, individuals with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards others respecting goods and property at work and are hence more likely to tolerate acts of petty theft. Even if they may refrain from such behaviours themselves, they may fail to condemn theft under certain conditions and find ways to rationalise or justify such behaviours. In fact, their tolerance towards theft may be triggered when faced with injustice, as they may consider theft a form of compensation for the employee.

Self: This facet measures attitudes towards one’s own behaviour.

People with high scores show positive attitudes towards respecting goods and property in their own behaviour. Respecting goods and property at work is essential to them and they are very unlikely to engage in the act of stealing, of any kind.

On the other hand, people with a low score show negative attitudes towards respecting goods and property in their own behaviour. They are likely to attach little importance to respecting property boundaries and may develop feelings of entitlement when believed to be underpaid or undervalued at work. This may lead them to justify and rationalise acts of petty theft, perhaps viewing them as a form of retribution.

Respect for Facts and Honesty

This factor measures individuals’ attitudes towards respecting facts and honesty. It aims to measure individuals’ levels of acceptance of manipulation of information and deceitful behaviour. It also aims to identify those who reject all forms of dishonesty and can maintain authentic work relationships characterised by mutual trust.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards another people’s behaviour.

Individuals with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards other people respecting facts and honesty. They tend to find manipulation unacceptable and show no tolerance for other peoples' lies or deceitful behaviour.

On the other hand, people with low scores on this facet show negative attitudes towards other people respecting facts and honesty. They are likely to tolerate a certain degree of dishonesty and manipulation of information under certain conditions. For instance, even if they remain honest and truthful themselves, they may accept other people hiding or transforming information if that helps them reach their objectives or make a project succeed.

Self: this facet measures attitudes towards one’s own behaviour.

Individuals with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards respecting facts and honesty in their own behaviour and are hence more likely to believe they must report information in a factual and honest manner. They tend to remain truthful, even if it could harm them professionally.

On the other hand, people with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards respecting facts and honesty in their own behaviour. They tend to have a relativist attitude towards the truth and may justify or rationalise hiding or transforming information to succeed.
 
Respect for Laws and Procedures

This factor measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting laws and procedures meant to protect organisational interests. It aims to measure a person’s level of acceptance of corrupt behaviour and identify those who, by rejecting the idea that laws are meant to be reinterpreted, bent or broken in order to gain profit, are likely to contribute to a profitable work environment.

Others: This facet measures attitudes towards another people’s behaviour.

People with high scores on this facet are attached to the concept of legality, believing in the virtues and importance of the law above self-interest. They do not tolerate or accept other people bending the rules to pursue self-interested goals and may want to report or denounce acts of corruption they witness.

On the other hand, individuals with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards other people respecting laws and procedures and are hence more likely to tolerate other people bending laws for personal gain. Even if they may not engage in these behaviours themselves, they are likely to accept a counterproductive work culture wherein norms can be bent or even broken for more profit.

Self: This facet relates to attitudes toward one’s own behaviour.

Individuals with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards respecting laws and procedures in their own behaviour. Being attached to the concept of legality, they are unlikely to initiate or even participate in the bending of rules to meet self-interested goals. Unlikely to fall into corruption, they help create and maintain a harmonious work environment characterised by respect for the law.

On the other hand, individuals with a low score show negative attitudes towards respecting laws and procedures in their own behaviour, indicating that they regard the law with some degree of leniency, especially when the rules hinder personal interests. As a result they are more likely to take advantage of their position to reach their goals, sometimes at the detriment of the organisation’s interests.

Respect for Equality

This factor measures a person’s attitudes towards respecting equality. It aims to measure a person’s level of acceptance of acts of discrimination in the workplace such as the allocation of tasks based on individuals’ physical appearance or sexual orientation. This dimension intents to identify those who recognise, respect, and value people’s differences and can contribute to an inclusive work environment.

Others: This facet measures attitudes towards another people’s behaviour.

People with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards other people respecting equality. They are likely to feel uncomfortable when faced with acts of discrimination and to report such behaviours. They tend to encourage an inclusive work environment.

People with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards other people respecting equality. More likely to adhere to some stereotypes and preconceived ideas, they can tolerate acts of discrimination when they believe these are justifiable. Although they will not necessarily engage in acts of discrimination themselves, their lenient attitude towards discriminatory behaviour might lead them to support an unjust work environment.
 
Self: this facet relates to attitudes towards one’s own behaviour.

People with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards respecting equality in their own behaviour. They are likely to treat everyone fairly and to acknowledge people based on their professional accomplishments rather than on irrelevant personal or physical characteristics. They tend to recognise, respect, and value people’s differences and can contribute to an inclusive work environment.

On the other hand, people with a low score tend to show negative attitudes towards respecting equality in their own behaviour. They are likely to justify adopting discriminatory behaviour for the sake of productivity and team harmony. Believing that it is sometimes acceptable to treat people unequally under certain conditions, they may unknowingly contribute to maintaining an unjust work environment.

Respect for Other People

This factor measures a person’s attitudes towards respecting people at work. It aims to measure people’s level of acceptance of inappropriate or offensive work behaviour, which can lead to accepting bullying and harassment. It also aims to identify those likely to create and maintain a civil and respectful work environment characterised by respectfulness towards other people.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards another people’s behaviour.

A person with a high score on this facet shows positive attitudes towards individuals respecting other people at work. They are likely to feel uncomfortable working in environments where people are not valued, and where harassment or bullying can take place. They do not tolerate people being mistreated or degraded in the workplace and are likely to report any such behaviour, thereby helping support a respectful work environment.

On the other hand, people with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards others’ respect of other people at work. They are likely to tolerate a certain degree of inappropriate or offensive behaviour towards others at work, which they tend to justify as necessary for people to learn and for the well-functioning of the company. For instance, they can accept advertising someone’s mistake to make an example of them. Even if they may not engage in these behaviours themselves, their tendency to approve of offensive behaviour can lead them to support a damaging work environment harmful to employees’ well-being.

Self: this facet relates to attitudes towards one’s own behaviour.

Individuals with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards respecting others at work in their own behaviour. They are unlikely to initiate or participate in any offensive or degrading behaviour towards other people and tend to remain courteous and respectful with their co-workers, helping create a healthy work environment where people are treated with consideration and civility. On the contrary, people with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards respecting others in their own behaviour. Under certain conditions they are likely to view offensive and degrading behaviour as common and tolerable aspects of the corporate world that they willingly participate in. Unbothered by some degree of mistreatment of others, they can justify these behaviours as essential for people to learn and for the company to succeed. As a result, they help create and maintain an inappropriate work environment that can be damaging to employees' well-being.
 
Respect for Commitments

This factor measures an individual’s attitudes towards respecting commitments. It aims to evaluate people’s level of acceptance of behaviours related to people’s lack of commitment to their work. It also aims to identify those who are likely to be reliable and dependable at work, which includes being punctual, being concerned about work quality and staffing arrangements during one’s absence and taking responsibility for one’s own actions.

Others: this facet measures attitudes towards another people’s behaviour.

Individuals with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards others respecting commitments at work. They are likely to feel uncomfortable with people who do not uphold their commitments and to disapprove of behaviours they deem unreliable. Believing in the importance of staying true to one’s word, they are unlikely to tolerate behaviours that demonstrate a lack of respect for work commitments, such as being late, taking too many breaks, or being unprepared for meetings.

On the other hand, people with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards others’ respect of work commitments. They are likely to tolerate a certain degree of flexibility in people’s adherence to work commitments, an approach that they justify as being realistic. Even if they do not necessarily lack respect for their own commitments, they can tolerate levels of unreliability in others at work and will not be bothered by people’s fickleness.

Self: this facet relates to attitudes towards one’s own behaviour.

individuals with a high score on this facet show positive attitudes towards respecting work commitments in their own behaviour. They are likely to adhere to their work commitments which renders them trustworthy and reliable. Because of their tendency to respect their work commitments, they can be counted on to work efficiently even when unsupervised.

In contrast to this, people with a low score on this facet show negative attitudes towards respecting commitments at work in their own behaviour. They are likely to grant less importance to their own work commitments which can make them unreliable at times. They view the commitments they make to their work with a degree of flexibility, and as a result cannot always be counted on to be punctual, meet deadlines, or work efficiently when unsupervised.

2.3.5.	Item Construction and Pre-tests

The items in ETIX were developed by a team of experts consisting of psychologists and research consultants in English, and then translated and adapted into French and Spanish after the first English pre-test by the same team of experts. 20 items were created for each factor, 10 per facet, and an additional 20 items for the social desirability scale. The questionnaire consists of a total of 140 questions in normative format with the following 4-point Likert scale.

Example of item measuring Respect for Facts and Honesty:
 
 


The English version of ETIX underwent a first pre-test with a sample of working professionals from various English-speaking populations. The items were tested for reliability, sensitivity, and correlation with their own factor in order to identify the items that needed to be reviewed and improved. After this first revision, the questionnaire was translated into French and Spanish and tested with a sample of working professionals from each language. ETIX underwent two different pre-tests in English before undergoing a Pilot study with 306 working professionals from the UK, one pre-test in Spanish before undergoing a Pilot study with 312 working professionals form Spain, and one pre-test in French before undergoing a Pilot study with 299 working professionals from France. These multiple revisions were conducted to obtain the best results in terms of reliability and validity. The following table summarises the evolution and improvement of ETIX in terms of reliability (Cronbach’s alpha) between the pre- tests and pilot studies for the three languages (see next page).
 
Table 1. Evolution of Alphas.

		Respect for Laws & Procedures	Respect for Goods & Property	Respect for Facts & Honesty	Respect for Other People	Respect for Commitments	Respect for Equality
		Factor	Self	Others	Factor	Self	Others	Factor	Self	Others	Factor	Self	Others	Factor	Self	Others	Factor	Self	Others
	Pretest (N=202)	
0.78	
0.59	
0.68	
0.74	
0.57	
0.61	
0.66	
0.42	
0.47	
0.79	
0.64	
0.64	
0.72	
0.61	
0.49	
0.80	
0.72	
0.58
English	Pretest 2 (N=502)	0.88	0.77	0.79	0.88	0.71	0.81	0.92	0.84	0.85	0.88	0.76	0.80	0.86	0.78	0.74	0.90	0.83	0.77
	Pilot (N=306)	0.93	0.83	0.85	0.93	0.86	0.87	0.94	0.90	0.87	0.90	0.81	0.80	0.88	0.82	0.76	0.91	0.80	0.85
	Pretest (N=238)	0.81	0.61	0.69	0.88	0.67	0.71	0.83	0.69	0.72	0.79	0.57	0.72	0.85	0.73	0.73	0.78	0.55	0.68
Spanish																			
	Pilot (N=312)																		
		0.88	0.76	0.80	0.88	0.78	0.78	0.92	0.85	0.85	0.87	0.75	0.76	0.89	0.81	0.77	0.87	0.71	0.80
	Pretest (N=159)	0.78	0.66	0.54	0.79	0.59	0.64	0.83	0.71	0.68	0.82	0.61	0.71	0.73	0.61	0.71	0.84	0.71	0.69
French																			
	Pilot
(N=299)	0.92	0.84	0.85	0.89	0.77	0.82	0.93	0.90	0.84	0.90	0.82	0.81	0.90	0.83	0.80	0.90	0.75	0.85
 
3.	Sample Descriptives
The data presented is from a UK sample of 306 professionals (145 male, 161 female) with ages ranging from 20 to 69 (M=43.82, SD=11.04). The professional sample derived was from a range of job sectors including finance, medicine, sales, and technology, and also a variety of study levels ranging from trades training to PhD. Tables 2-5 provide an overview of the sample.


Table 2. Distribution based on Gender.

Gender	Percentage (%)	N
Male	47.39	145
Female	52.61	161


Table 3. Distribution based on Age.

Age	Percentage (%)	N
Under 28	6.86	21
28-33	14.38	44
34-42	29.08	89
44+	49.67	152


Table 4. Distribution based on Study Level.

Study Level	Percentage (%)	N
Level 1: Master’s/PhD	10.13	31
Level 2: Bachelor’s Degree	32.68	100
Level 3: Two Years Vocational Study	18.63	57
Level 4: High School Diploma	29.41	90
Level 5: Trades Training/No Study	9.15	28
 
Table 5. Distribution based on Socio-professional Category.

Socio-demographic (N=306)	Percentage (%)	N
Accounting and Finance	21.90	67
Training and Teaching	8.82	27
Arts	3.59	11
Hospitality and Tourism	10.13	31
Technology and IT	13.40	41
Sales	9.15	28
Medical	4.25	13
Administration and Secretarial	6.86	21
Legal	0.33	1
Research and Development	1.63	5
Public and Social Services	4.90	15
Communications and Marketing	1.31	4
Construction	6.21	19
Environmental	2.29	7
Management	5.23	16
 
4.	Norms
Norms help in the comparison of an individual’s score with the scores of others who have completed the same assessment. The individuals who took the test are considered representative of the population and so are used for norming. The closer the sample population falls to the target population, the more accurate the distribution will be when used to rank individuals. Norm groups enable us to compare an individual’s score to those of a similar population.

ETIX was administered to 357 UK working professionals using a questionnaire compiled of 140 Likert scale items from 1 to 4 (1 being strongly disagree with the item and 4 being strongly agree) to measure attitudes towards counterproductive work behaviours. The sample was provided via the professional research and sampling firm CINT. Respondents received compensation from CINT for their participation. Respondents whose answers were deemed unreliable or those who completed the assessment in under 13 minutes were excluded from the sample, resulting in a final sample of 306 respondents.

The following histogram illustrates the general ETIX score distribution for the UK sample of working professionals. The histogram shows that the data is negatively skewed, with a mean score of 6.41 out of 10. This indicates that the data does not follow a normal distribution, which should be taken into account when interpreting the scores. Because the mean score is 6.41 instead of 5.00, which would be typical of a normal distribution, a high score will be considered to be above 8.50 and a low score will be considered to be below 4.50. While the mean global score is 6.41, the median global score is
5.98. Although the median still demonstrates that the data is negatively skewed, it is a better measure of central tendency than the mean as the mean is sensitive to extreme scores. Specific population norms discussed below will provide greater insight into the interpretation of high and low scores for specific populations.



Figure 1. Distribution of UK Sample.
 
4.1.	Norms for UK Sample
Tables 6-14 show norms for the UK sample on both the ETIX factors and their facets Self and Others. The sample is organised into categories based on study level, age, socio-professional category, and gender.


Table 6. Factor Score Norms for the UK Sample.

Factors	Score	Mean	Median	Standard
Deviation	Standard Error of
Measurement	Min	Max
	Factor	6.75	7.05	2.12	0.12	1.05	10.00
Respect for Goods and Property	Self	6.88	7.30	2.17	0.12	0.80	10.00
	Others	6.62	6.90	2.19	0.13	0.80	10.00
	Factor	6.64	7.03	2.13	0.12	0.15	10.00
Respect for Facts and Honesty	Self	6.57	7.00	2.28	0.13	0.00	10.00
	Others	6.71	7.00	2.11	0.12	0.30	10.00
	Factor	6.12	6.30	1.98	0.11	0.65	9.90
Respect for Laws and Procedures	Self	5.89	6.00	2.04	0.12	0.30	10.00
	Others	6.34	6.50	2.10	0.12	0.80	10.00
	Factor	6.34	6.40	1.80	0.10	1.05	9.90
Respect for Other People	Self	6.29	6.50	1.89	0.11	0.80	10.00
	Others	6.40	6.50	1.89	0.11	1.00	10.00
	Factor	6.09	6.40	1.90	0.11	1.30	10.00
Respect for Commitments	Self	6.14	6.30	2.02	0.12	1.30	10.00
	Others	6.04	6.30	1.99	0.11	0.80	10.00
	Factor	6.49	6.75	2.00	0.11	0.90	10.00
Respect for Equality	Self	6.51	6.80	1.94	0.11	1.30	10.00
	Others	6.48	7.00	2.21	0.13	0.50	10.00
	Factor	3.68	3.65	1.90	0.06	1.05	6.80
Social Desirability	Self	3.59	3.50	1.31	0.08	0.30	7.50
	Others	3.76	3.50	1.25	0.07	0.80	8.80
 
Table 7. Study Level by Factors.


Study level	
N	
Commitments	Goods and
Property	Facts and
Honesty	Laws and Procedures	Other People	
Equality
	Mean	6.01	6.40	6.37	5.76	5.93	6.13
Trades training/No study	Median	6.38	6.65	6.45	5.70	6.03	6.20
	28						
	SD	1.70	1.99	1.91	1.71	1.35	1.65
	SEM	0.32	0.38	0.36	0.32	0.25	0.31
	Mean	6.35	7.19	6.97	6.46	6.28	6.53
High school diploma	Median	6.65	7.33	7.35	6.78	6.15	6.65
	90						
	SD	1.99	2.09	2.05	1.91	1.90	1.96
	SEM	0.21	0.22	0.22	0.20	0.20	0.21
	Mean	6.34	7.06	6.78	6.29	6.85	6.60
Two years vocational study/University	Median	6.80	7.40	7.15	6.55	7.05	7.15
	70						
	SD	1.70	1.81	2.00	1.90	1.48	1.91
	SEM	0.22	0.24	0.26	0.25	0.20	0.25
	Mean	5.87	6.40	6.48	5.90	6.33	6.63
	Median	6.10	6.75	7.03	6.03	6.70	7.20
Bachelor’s	100						
	SD	1.81	2.10	2.21	1.99	1.81	2.05
	SEM	0.18	0.21	0.22	0.20	0.18	0.21
	Mean	5.63	6.31	6.20	5.80	6.01	6.07
	Median	5.90	6.65	7.00	6.05	6.75	6.65
Master’s/PhD	31						
	SD	2.23	2.55	2.34	2.29	2.15	2.31
	SEM	0.40	0.46	0.42	0.41	0.39	0.42
 
Table 8. Study Level by Facets.

Study Level	N		CS	CO	GS	GO	FS	FO	LS	LO	ES	EO	PS	PO
		Mean	6.23	5.80	6.57	6.23	6.46	6.29	5.53	5.99	6.19	6.06	5.99	5.87
Trades training/No study		Median	6.30	5.90	6.65	6.50	6.25	6.25	5.40	6.15	6.25	6.15	6.15	6.00
	28												
		SD	1.87	1.80	2.08	1.98	1.91	2.02	1.75	1.80	1.64	1.86	1.56	1.41
		SEM	0.35	0.34	0.39	0.37	0.36	0.38	0.33	0.34	0.31	0.35	0.29	0.27
		Mean	6.39	6.30	7.22	7.15	6.95	6.99	6.27	6.65	6.62	6.44	6.17	6.39
High school diploma		Median	6.40	6.80	7.50	7.50	7.30	7.30	6.50	6.80	6.50	6.80	6.30	6.50
	90												
		SD	2.11	2.06	2.20	2.13	2.24	2.03	2.03	2.04	1.90	2.16	1.99	1.93
		SEM	0.22	0.22	0.23	0.22	0.24	0.21	0.21	0.22	0.20	0.23	0.21	0.20
		Mean	6.31	6.38	7.15	6.97	6.66	6.91	6.03	6.56	6.61	6.59	6.83	6.87
Two years vocational study/University		Median	6.80	6.50	7.50	7.30	7.00	7.00	6.30	7.00	6.80	7.30	7.00	7.30
	70												
		SD	1.81	1.87	1.89	1.86	2.19	1.94	1.95	2.03	1.82	2.13	1.49	1.69
		SEM	0.24	0.25	0.25	0.25	0.29	0.26	0.26	0.27	0.24	0.28	0.20	0.22
		Mean	5.92	5.83	6.61	6.19	6.38	6.58	5.64	6.16	6.58	6.68	6.29	6.38
		Median	6.30	5.90	7.00	6.50	7.00	7.00	6.00	6.50	7.00	7.00	6.80	6.30
Bachelor’s	100												
		SD	1.91	1.89	2.18	2.16	2.34	2.18	2.03	2.12	1.98	2.27	1.93	1.82
		SEM	0.19	0.19	0.22	0.22	0.23	0.22	0.20	0.21	0.20	0.23	0.19	0.18
		Mean	5.69	5.57	6.48	6.15	6.04	6.35	5.60	5.99	6.02	6.12	5.89	6.12
Master’s/PhD	31	Median	6.00	6.00	6.50	7.30	6.80	7.00	5.80	6.30	6.30	6.80	6.50	7.00
		SD	2.38	2.23	2.40	2.74	2.45	2.33	2.29	2.38	2.21	2.50	2.20	2.21
 

SEM	0.43	0.40	0.43	0.49	0.44	0.42	0.41	0.43	0.40	0.45	0.39	0.40

•	C.S – Commitment Self
•	C.O – Commitment Others
•	G.S – Goods and Property Self
•	G.O – Goods and Property Others
•	F.S – Facts and Honesty Self
•	F.O – Facts and Honesty Others
•	L.S – Laws and Procedures Self
•	L.O – Laws and Procedures Others
•	E.S – Equality Self
•	E.O – Equality Others
•	P.S – Other People Self
•	P.O – Other People Others
 
Table 9. Age by Factors.


Age	
N	
Commitments	Goods and
Property	Facts and Honesty	Laws and Procedures	Other People	
Equality
	Mean	5.80	5.97	5.71	5.17	5.87	6.29
Under 28	Median	6.30	6.15	6.00	5.00	6.05	6.65
	21						
	SD	2.06	2.21	2.14	1.71	1.76	1.99
	SEM	0.42	0.47	0.5	0.37	0.4	0.48
	Mean	5.86	6.46	6.44	5.81	6.34	6.67
	Median	5.98	6.45	6.65	5.35	6.48	7.20
28-33	44						
	SD	2.42	2.61	2.56	2.23	2.18	2.42
	SEM	0.39	0.41	0.39	0.35	0.33	0.37
	Mean	5.81	6.44	6.31	5.91	6.33	6.42
	Median	5.90	6.90	6.75	6.00	6.40	6.65
34-43	89						
	SD	1.77	2.05	2.05	1.88	1.71	1.85
	SEM	0.18	0.22	0.21	0.21	0.19	0.21
	Mean	6.36	7.11	7.02	6.45	6.42	6.51

Over 44	Median	6.55	7.35	7.45	6.65	6.60	6.90
	152						
	SD	1.73	1.92	1.95	1.92	1.73	1.96
	SEM	0.15	0.16	0.16	0.15	0.14	0.15
 
Table 10. Age by Facets.

Age
(years)	N	CS	CO	GS	GO	FS	FO	LS	LO	ES	EO	PS	PO
	Mean	5.97	5.63	6.10	5.85	5.39	6.03	4.78	5.57	6.17	6.41	5.72	6.01
Under 28	Median	6.50	6.30	6.30	5.80	5.50	6.50	4.80	5.00	6.30	6.80	6.00	6.00
	21												
	SD	2.17	2.13	2.36	2.16	2.16	2.22	1.61	1.96	1.81	2.29	2.09	1.60
	SEM	0.42	0.46	0.48	0.49	0.53	0.50	0.38	0.41	0.47	0.51	0.45	0.39
	Mean	5.81	5.90	6.74	6.19	6.28	6.60	5.57	6.05	6.67	6.68	6.43	6.25
	Median	5.90	6.00	7.00	6.00	6.65	6.75	5.40	6.30	7.00	7.15	6.80	6.30
28-33	44												
	SD	2.53	2.46	2.57	2.74	2.67	2.56	2.36	2.29	2.43	2.51	2.26	2.19
	SEM	0.39	0.40	0.40	0.42	0.40	0.39	0.36	0.35	0.35	0.41	0.34	0.33
	Mean	5.87	5.75	6.52	6.36	6.27	6.36	5.69	6.13	6.36	6.48	6.26	6.39
	Median	6.00	6.00	7.00	6.80	7.00	6.80	6.00	6.30	6.50	6.80	6.50	6.50
34-43	89												
	SD	1.94	1.86	2.12	2.13	2.21	2.03	1.89	2.01	1.74	2.08	1.72	1.84
	SEM	0.20	0.19	0.22	0.23	0.23	0.21	0.21	0.22	0.21	0.23	0.19	0.20
	Mean	6.41	6.31	7.23	7.00	7.01	7.04	6.24	6.66	6.59	6.44	6.34	6.50
	Median	6.80	6.50	7.80	7.30	7.30	7.30	6.50	7.00	6.80	7.00	6.50	6.50
Over 44	152												
	SD	1.83	1.84	1.98	1.97	2.10	1.93	1.99	2.06	1.89	2.19	1.82	1.79
	SEM	0.15	0.15	0.16	0.16	0.17	0.16	0.16	0.16	0.14	0.17	0.14	0.14

C.S – Commitment Self ◦ C.O – Commitment Others ◦ G.S – Goods and Property Self ◦ G.O – Goods and Property Others ◦ F.S – Facts and Honesty Self ◦ F.O – Facts and Honesty Others ◦ L.S – Laws and Procedures Self ◦ L.O – Laws and Procedures Others ◦ E.S – Equality Self ◦ E.O – Equality Others ◦ P.S – Other People Self ◦
P.O – Other People Others
 
Table 11. Socio-professional Category by Factors.


Job Description	
N		Commit- ments	Goods and
Property	Facts and
Honesty	Laws and Procedures	Other People	
Equality
		Mean	6.04	6.65	6.85	6.14	6.45	6.61

Accounting and Finance		Median	6.00	7.00	7.15	6.15	6.40	6.65
	67							
		SD	1.90	2.21	1.95	1.81	1.73	1.78
		SEM	0.23	0.25	0.24	0.22	0.21	0.22
		Mean	6.52	7.66	7.67	7.13	6.91	7.26

Training and Teaching		Median	6.80	7.65	7.90	7.65	7.50	7.65
	27							
		SD	1.22	1.33	1.21	1.52	1.47	1.32
		SEM	0.24	0.26	0.23	0.29	0.28	0.25
		Mean	6.14	7.25	7.58	6.22	6.47	7.68
		Median	6.15	7.40	8.25	6.05	6.90	7.50
Arts	11							
		SD	1.50	1.56	1.76	1.70	1.50	1.15
		SEM	0.45	0.47	0.53	0.51	0.45	0.35
		Mean	6.67	6.96	6.66	6.36	6.39	6.67

Hospitality/ training		Median	7.00	7.30	7.15	6.65	6.40	7.25
	31							
		SD	1.48	1.81	1.94	1.91	1.27	1.73
		SEM	0.27	0.32	0.35	0.34	0.23	0.31
		Mean	5.46	6.11	6.07	5.45	5.85	5.84
		Median	5.75	6.55	6.90	6.15	5.90	6.05
Tech/IT	41							
		SD	2.36	2.60	2.59	2.40	2.25	2.46
		SEM	0.37	0.41	0.40	0.37	0.35	0.38
		Mean	6.10	6.77	6.60	6.21	6.33	5.85
Sales	28	Median	5.78	7.20	6.50	6.60	6.28	6.10
		SD	1.90	2.07	2.18	1.88	1.69	2.14
 

		SEM	0.36	0.39	0.41	0.35	0.32	0.41
		Mean	6.27	6.88	7.07	6.53	7.40	7.20
		Median	6.25	6.80	7.65	6.75	7.90	7.90
Medical	13							
		SD	1.63	2.21	2.08	1.86	1.71	1.97
		SEM	0.45	0.61	0.58	0.52	0.48	0.55
		Mean	6.13	6.95	6.55	6.35	6.55	6.93
		Median	6.50	7.50	7.00	6.55	7.00	7.15
Admin/Secretary	21							
		SD	1.87	1.92	2.04	1.77	1.61	1.67
		SEM	0.41	0.42	0.45	0.39	0.35	0.36
Legal	1	Mean	9.15	7.90	8.40	7.65	8.00	8.55
		Mean	5.80	5.50	6.25	4.90	6.90	4.80

Research and Development		Median	1.37	1.73	1.89	0.94	1.96	2.25
	5							
		SD	0.61	0.77	0.84	0.42	0.88	1.01
		SEM	6.44	7.40	6.93	6.56	6.75	7.03
		Mean	6.50	7.40	6.75	6.90	6.55	7.05

Public/Social services		Median	1.75	1.83	1.88	1.88	1.83	1.62
	15							
		SD	0.45	0.47	0.49	0.49	0.47	0.42
		SEM	5.28	7.36	6.35	5.90	6.59	7.09
		Mean	4.90	6.78	6.13	5.53	6.15	7.28

Communications/ Marketing		Median	0.98	1.58	1.66	1.28	1.75	1.93
	4							
		SD	0.49	0.79	0.83	0.64	0.87	0.97
		SEM	5.59	5.92	5.53	5.20	5.26	5.28
		Mean	5.25	5.40	5.55	4.90	5.15	4.55
Construction	19	Median	2.19	2.39	2.23	1.96	1.61	2.09
		SD	0.50	0.55	0.51	0.45	0.37	0.48
 
	SEM	6.88	7.41	6.69	6.36	6.62	6.94
	Mean	7.15	7.75	6.75	6.65	6.65	7.55
	Median	1.13	1.31	1.75	1.73	1.21	1.35
Environmental	7						
	SD	0.43	0.50	0.66	0.65	0.46	0.51
	SEM	5.95	6.14	6.17	5.51	5.65	6.03
	Mean	6.20	6.78	6.95	5.78	5.95	6.58
	Median	2.25	2.52	2.45	2.22	2.05	2.29
Management	16						
	SD	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.51	0.57
	SEM	6.04	6.65	6.85	6.14	6.45	6.61
 
Table 12. Socio-professional Category by Facets.

Job Description	N	CS	CO	GS	GO	FS	FO	LS	LO	ES	EO	PS	PO
	Mean	6.04	6.05	6.77	6.52	6.82	6.87	5.92	6.35	6.56	6.66	6.47	6.44
	Median	6.00	6.00	7.30	6.50	7.30	7.00	6.30	6.30	6.50	6.80	6.50	6.50
Accounting and Finance	67												
	SD	2.00	2.00	2.13	2.12	2.15	1.90	1.87	1.98	1.80	1.86	1.84	1.75
	SEM	0.24	0.24	0.26	0.26	0.26	0.23	0.23	0.24	0.22	0.23	0.23	0.21
	Mean	6.54	6.49	7.81	7.52	7.67	7.67	6.76	7.50	7.04	7.49	6.86	6.96
	Median	6.80	6.50	8.00	7.50	7.80	7.80	7.00	8.00	7.50	7.80	7.30	7.50
Training and Teaching	27												
	SD	1.35	1.28	1.42	1.39	1.35	1.22	1.73	1.54	1.44	1.47	1.63	1.47
	SEM	0.26	0.25	0.27	0.27	0.26	0.23	0.33	0.30	0.28	0.28	0.31	0.28
	Mean	6.62	5.65	7.45	7.06	7.63	7.54	5.99	6.45	7.55	7.82	6.55	6.40
	Median	6.80	5.50	7.50	7.50	8.50	8.00	6.80	7.00	7.30	8.00	6.50	6.80
Arts	11												
	SD	1.62	1.59	1.34	1.86	2.01	1.55	1.81	1.81	1.18	1.31	1.47	1.70
	SEM	0.49	0.48	0.41	0.56	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.55	0.36	0.39	0.44	0.51
	Mean	6.69	6.66	6.96	6.95	6.45	6.87	6.13	6.60	6.59	6.75	6.31	6.47
Hospitality/Training	31												
	Median	7.00	7.00	7.50	7.30	7.00	7.50	6.30	6.50	6.50	7.30	6.50	6.50
 

	SD	1.58	1.58	1.88	1.90	2.05	1.97	1.96	2.00	1.60	2.01	1.27	1.45
	SEM	0.28	0.28	0.34	0.34	0.37	0.35	0.35	0.36	0.29	0.36	0.23	0.26
	Mean	5.53	5.39	6.27	5.96	6.06	6.07	5.30	5.60	6.12	5.57	5.78	5.93
	Median	6.00	5.80	7.00	6.50	6.80	6.80	5.50	6.00	6.30	5.80	6.30	6.00
Tech/IT	41												
	SD	2.46	2.41	2.64	2.63	2.74	2.54	2.43	2.44	2.29	2.75	2.29	2.29
	SEM	0.38	0.38	0.41	0.41	0.43	0.40	0.38	0.38	0.36	0.43	0.36	0.36
	Mean	6.37	5.84	6.90	6.63	6.67	6.53	6.10	6.33	6.05	5.65	6.37	6.28
	Median	6.15	5.50	7.50	6.65	6.90	6.00	6.00	6.65	6.00	5.90	6.65	6.30
Sales	28												
	SD	1.99	1.96	2.18	2.06	2.31	2.16	2.04	1.97	2.09	2.30	1.67	1.92
	SEM	0.38	0.37	0.41	0.39	0.44	0.41	0.38	0.37	0.40	0.44	0.32	0.36
	Mean	6.38	6.17	7.02	6.75	7.08	7.07	6.27	6.80	7.35	7.05	7.38	7.42
	Median	6.30	6.30	7.00	6.00	7.80	7.30	6.50	7.00	7.30	6.80	8.00	7.30
Medical (all levels)	13												
	SD	1.64	1.85	2.28	2.22	2.24	2.04	1.91	1.92	2.05	2.14	1.87	1.63
	SEM	0.45	0.51	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.57	0.53	0.53	0.57	0.59	0.52	0.45
	Mean	6.24	6.01	7.20	6.70	6.36	6.75	6.20	6.50	6.80	7.06	6.40	6.69
Admin/Secretary	21												
	Median	7.00	6.00	8.00	7.50	7.00	7.00	6.30	7.00	7.00	7.00	7.00	7.00
 

		SD	2.02	1.89	1.99	2.00	2.27	1.92	1.80	1.96	1.71	1.79	1.76	1.61
		SEM	0.44	0.41	0.43	0.44	0.50	0.42	0.39	0.43	0.37	0.39	0.38	0.35
Legal	1	Mean	7.80	9.30	8.80	9.50	7.80	8.00	8.30	8.50	7.50	7.80	8.00	8.00
		Mean	1.74	1.21	1.52	2.06	1.94	1.94	0.94	1.11	2.06	2.46	2.05	2.01

Research and Development	
5	Median	0.78	0.54	0.68	0.92	0.87	0.87	0.42	0.50	0.92	1.10	0.92	0.90
		SD	6.21	6.67	7.44	7.36	6.71	7.14	6.29	6.83	6.97	7.10	6.67	6.84
		SEM	6.00	6.80	7.50	7.50	6.00	7.00	6.80	6.80	7.30	7.30	6.50	6.50
		Mean	1.83	1.79	1.99	1.80	1.80	2.13	1.90	2.05	1.51	1.84	1.96	1.82
		Median	0.47	0.46	0.51	0.47	0.47	0.55	0.49	0.53	0.39	0.47	0.51	0.47
Public/Social services	15													
		SD	4.65	5.90	6.95	7.78	5.88	6.83	5.53	6.28	7.40	6.78	6.15	7.03
		SEM	5.30	5.90	6.90	7.30	6.00	6.25	5.40	5.65	7.15	7.40	5.40	7.15
		Mean	1.56	2.16	2.14	1.37	1.98	1.47	1.00	1.68	1.74	2.21	1.67	2.15
		Median	0.78	1.08	1.07	0.69	0.99	0.74	0.50	0.84	0.87	1.10	0.83	1.07
Communications/Marketing	4													
		SD	5.59	5.59	6.12	5.73	5.36	5.69	4.98	5.42	5.46	5.11	5.21	5.30
		SEM	4.80	5.80	5.80	5.00	5.00	5.50	4.80	5.50	4.80	4.80	5.00	5.50
Construction	19	Mean	2.36	2.30	2.46	2.41	2.29	2.35	2.07	2.10	2.16	2.15	1.57	1.78
 

	Median	0.54	0.53	0.56	0.55	0.52	0.54	0.48	0.48	0.50	0.49	0.36	0.41
	SD	7.23	6.53	7.70	7.11	6.89	6.49	5.84	6.87	6.77	7.10	6.74	6.50
	SEM	7.50	6.30	7.80	7.50	6.50	6.80	5.80	7.30	7.50	7.50	7.00	6.30
	Mean	1.18	1.28	1.24	1.41	1.97	1.57	1.92	1.68	1.47	1.33	1.48	1.31
	Median	0.45	0.48	0.47	0.53	0.74	0.59	0.73	0.63	0.55	0.50	0.56	0.50
Environmental	7												
	SD	5.81	6.09	6.29	6.00	5.96	6.38	5.19	5.83	6.05	6.01	5.26	6.05
	SEM	6.00	6.25	6.80	6.40	6.75	7.30	5.25	6.05	5.90	7.15	5.50	6.65
	Mean	2.38	2.19	2.41	2.75	2.46	2.50	2.17	2.43	2.06	2.60	2.25	1.97
	Median	0.59	0.55	0.60	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.52	0.65	0.56	0.49
Management	16												
	SD	6.04	6.05	6.77	6.52	6.82	6.87	5.92	6.35	6.56	6.66	6.47	6.44
	SEM	6.00	6.00	7.30	6.50	7.30	7.00	6.30	6.30	6.50	6.80	6.50	6.50

C.S – Commitment Self ◦ C.O – Commitment Others ◦ G.S – Goods and Property Self ◦ G.O – Goods and Property Others ◦ F.S – Facts and Honesty Self ◦ F.O – Facts and Honesty Others ◦ L.S – Laws and Procedures Self ◦ L.O – Laws and Procedures Others ◦ E.S – Equality Self ◦ E.O – Equality Others ◦ P.S – Other People Self ◦
P.O – Other People Others
 
Table 13. Gender by Factors.

Gender	N	Commitments	Goods and Property	Facts and Honesty	Laws and Procedures	Other People	Equality
	Mean	5.78	6.42	6.13	5.64	5.74	6.01
	Median	6.15	6.75	6.50	5.74	5.75	6.50
Male	145						
	SD	2.04	2.25	2.28	2.11	1.80	2.12
	SEM	0.17	0.19	0.19	0.18	0.15	0.18
	Mean	6.36	7.04	7.10	6.54	6.89	6.93
	Median	6.50	7.40	7.50	6.90	7.15	7.15
Female	161						
	SD	1.78	1.96	1.9	1.85	1.66	2.01
	SEM	0.14	0.15	0.15	0.15	0.13	0.16
 
Table 14. Gender by Facets.

Gender	N	CS	CO	GS	GO	FS	FO	LS	LO	ES	EO	PS	PO
	Mean	5.87	5.70	6.53	6.31	6.05	6.22	5.42	5.86	6.04	5.97	5.70	5.78
	Median	6.30	6.00	6.80	6.50	6.50	6.80	5.50	5.80	6.30	6.50	5.80	5.80
Male	145												
	SD	2.13	2.05	2.32	2.30	2.44	2.26	2.07	2.20	1.93	2.18	1.97	1.93
	SEM	0.18	0.17	0.19	0.19	0.20	0.19	0.17	0.18	0.16	0.18	0.16	0.16
	Mean	6.38	6.35	7.18	6.89	7.04	7.16	6.30	6.78	6.92	6.94	6.82	6.95
	Median	6.50	6.50	7.50	7.00	7.50	7.50	6.50	7.30	7.00	7.30	7.00	7.30
Female	161												
	SD	1.91	1.85	2.01	2.06	2.03	1.91	1.95	1.94	1.90	2.24	1.75	1.72
	SEM	0.15	0.15	0.16	0.16	0.16	0.15	0.15	0.15	0.15	0.18	0.14	0.14

C.S – Commitment Self ◦ C.O – Commitment Others ◦ G.S – Goods and Property Self ◦ G.O – Goods and Property Others ◦ F.S – Facts and Honesty Self ◦ F.O – Facts and Honesty Others ◦ L.S – Laws and Procedures Self ◦ L.O – Laws and Procedures Others ◦ E.S –Equality Self ◦ E.O – Equality Others ◦ P.S – Other People Self ◦
P.O – Other People Others
 
4.2.	Spanish Sample

The questionnaire was also administered to a sample of 312 Spanish working professionals from Spain, which consisted of 146 males (46.79%) and 166 females (53.21%), ranging in age from 20 to 65 (M=41.63, SD=10.91). The sample was provided via the professional research and sampling firm CINT. Respondents received compensation from CINT for their participation. The following table shows the norms for the Spanish sample (see Table 15).


Table 15. Norms for Spanish Sample.


Factors	
Score	
Mean	
Median	Standard Deviation	Standard Error of
Measurement	
Minimum	
Maximum
	Factor	5.84	5.90	1.99	0.11	0.00	10.00
Respect for Goods and Property	
Self	
5.79	
6.00	
2.07	
0.12	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.89	6.00	2.04	0.12	0.00	10.00
	Factor	5.99	6.25	2.09	0.12	0.15	10.00
Respect for Facts and Honesty	
Self	
5.97	
6.00	
2.19	
0.12	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	6.01	6.30	2.13	0.12	0.00	10.00
	Factor	5.54	5.75	1.86	0.11	0.00	10.00
Respect for Laws and Procedures	
Self	
5.25	
5.30	
1.92	
0.11	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.84	6.00	1.97	0.11	0.00	10.00
	Factor	6.15	6.15	1.73	0.10	0.15	10.00
Respect for Other People	
Self	
6.24	
6.30	
1.78	
0.10	
0.30	
10.00
	Others	6.05	6.00	1.84	0.10	0.00	10.00
	Factor	5.97	6.00	1.94	0.11	0.00	10.00
Respect for Commitments	
Self	
6.07	
6.30	
2.06	
0.12	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.86	6.00	1.96	0.11	0.00	10.00
	Factor	6.30	6.40	1.82	0.10	0.50	9.90
Respect for Equality	
Self	
6.17	
6.30	
1.76	
0.10	
1.00	
9.80
	Others	6.43	6.65	2.01	0.11	0.00	10.00
 
	Factor	3.65	3.65	1.02	0.06	1.05	6.40
Social Desirability	Self	2.77	2.80	1.29	0.07	0.30	6.00
	Others	4.53	4.50	1.20	0.07	1.50	8.00


4.3.	French Sample
The questionnaire was also administered to a sample of 299 French working professionals from France, which consisted of 145 males (48.49%) and 154 females (51.51%), ranging in age from 20 to 65 (M=43.41, SD=10.91). The sample was provided via the professional research and sampling firm CINT. Respondents received compensation from CINT for their participation. The following table shows the norms for the French sample (see Table 16).


Table 16. Norms for French Sample.


Factors	
Score	
Mean	
Median	Standard Deviation	Standard Error of
Measurement	
Minimum	
Maximum
	Factor	5.65	5.65	1.97	0.11	0.00	9.65
Respect for Goods and Property	
Self	
5.76	
5.80	
1.99	
0.12	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.55	5.50	2.10	0.12	0.00	10.00
	Factor	5.82	5.90	2.15	0.12	0.00	10.00
Respect for Facts and Honesty	
Self	
6.17	
6.30	
2.38	
0.14	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.48	5.50	2.12	0.12	0.00	10.00
	Factor	5.55	5.55	2.10	0.12	0.00	10.00
Respect for Laws and Procedures	
Self	
5.38	
5.30	
2.20	
0.13	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.71	5.80	2.18	0.13	0.00	10.00
	Factor	5.40	5.50	1.93	0.11	0.00	10.00
Respect for Other People	
Self	
5.36	
5.50	
2.01	
0.12	
0.00	
10.00
	Others	5.44	5.50	2.03	0.12	0.00	10.00

Respect for Commitments	Factor	5.52	5.55	2.00	0.12	0.00	10.00
	Self	5.76	5.50	2.15	0.12	0.00	10.00
 
	Others	5.27	5.50	2.03	0.12	0.00	10.00
	Factor	6.40	6.65	1.97	0.11	0.50	10.00
Respect for Equality	
Self	
6.30	
6.50	
1.86	
0.11	
1.00	
10.00
	Others	6.51	6.80	2.23	0.13	0.00	10.00
	Factor	4.85	4.80	1.02	0.06	2.40	7.80
Social Desirability	Self	4.84	5.00	1.24	0.07	1.00	9.80
	Others	4.85	4.80	1.34	0.08	2.00	9.30
 
5.	Reliability
Reliability measures the extent to which an assessment is free from error and the degree to which items on a scale measure the same construct. For example, all of the items that measure Equality are coherent and reflect the definition of the factor. A primary concern, when developing and using assessments, is the extent to which random measurement errors influence test performance. If a test is unreliable it is impossible for it to be valid, as accuracy of results (validity) depends on the consistency (reliability) with which the same results are produced. Reliability enables test users to be confident that the results accurately reflect the test taker’s attitude, aptitude, or behaviour in the workplace. In the context of a work-based assessment, reliability helps assure test users that the scores obtained reflect how a job candidate or employee is likely to behave in the workplace, interact with others, and work on specific tasks. When an assessment has high reliability it also helps to guard against biases that may be caused from errors in human judgement during the recruitment and selection process.


5.1.	Internal Reliability
Internal, or inter-item, reliability measures the extent to which items on a scale are internally consistent and all measure the same construct. Internal reliability is measured by Cronbach’s Alpha (α), which computes the average of all possible inter-item correlations by generating item factor loadings, without relying on a single indicator of reliability which may contain large amounts of error. Cronbach’s Alpha ranges from 0 to 1 and has a recommended coefficient of .7, with 1 being total reliability (Nunnally, 1978); values greater than .9 are considered excellent, .7 to .9 is considered good, values of .6 to .7 are acceptable, .5 to .6 is poor, and values of less than .5 is unacceptable. In order to ensure strong internal reliability for ETIX, items with a lower than .7 (α) factor loading were altered during the pre-test stage. Items were amended if they had an inter-item correlation of less than .5 or if their factor’s alpha would have improved if that item was deleted.


Table 17. Internal Reliability of ETIX across Factors and Facets.

Factors	Facet self (α)	Facet Others (α)
Respect for Laws & Procedures	0.93	0.83	0.85
Respect for Goods & Property	0.93	0.86	0.87
Respect for Facts & Honesty	0.94	0.90	0.97
Respect for Other People	0.90	0.81	0.80
Respect for Commitments	0.88	0.82	0.76
Respect for Equality	0.91	0.80	0.85

Cronbach’s Alpha was computed for both factors and facets of ETIX on the standardised UK sample (n=306). Both the factors and the facets showed good internal consistency, all alphas being above .70 (see Table 17). The factor alphas of the ETIX assessment ranged from .88 to .94, therefore the internal
 
consistency of the factors is excellent. Additionally, the facet alphas ranged from .76 to .90 indicating a good internal consistency. ETIX had an overall alpha of .978 indicating that it is very reliable.

5.2.	Split-half Reliability
Split-half reliability is another measurement of reliability. In split-half reliability, the test is randomly divided and compared; by doing so this helps determine if, and how well, all parts of the test contribute to the measurement of the construct.

An advantage of this approach is that it only requires a single test administration. Split-half reliability is a correlation between the total scores of the two halves, and so each individual will have two scores, one for each half. For a normative test using a Likert response scale, such as ETIX, split-half reliability is calculated using Pearson Product Moment Correlation and the Spearman Brown formula.

Split-half reliability was computed using the UK sample (n=306) with a mean age of 44 (SD=11.05). Composite reliability coefficient was calculated for a random set. For this set, the first half of the test had a Cronbach’s Alpha of .943 while the second half had an Alpha of .970. As both halves have similar results the test is assumed to have good internal reliability. The ETIX scale as a whole appears to have an excellent internal consistency, with a Spearman-Brown coefficient of .944.
 
6.	Validity
Validity is the extent to which an assessment measures the underlying construct, in the present case is behaviour and/or attitudes. In terms of psychometric validity, it relates to the degree to which evidence and scientific theory support the interpretations of the test scores. Reliability is a prerequisite for validity, but it does not guarantee it. It is therefore important to prove the assessment’s reliability and validity independently. A valid test enables test users to make valid associations between assessed attitudes or behaviours and to target organisational outcomes such as job commitment, motivation, job performance, and effectiveness. Established validity also protects organisations from faulty, costly, unethical and legally risky personnel decisions.

Face validity ensures that the test is reasonable to respondents and non-psychologists who may decide to use it. This is a superficial aspect of validity; however, it is crucial as it is likely that bad face validity would lead to less cooperation by respondents.

Content validity refers to item construction and analysis. This ensures that the tool is representative of the construct. To ensure items are being created to measure the construct, both experts and the literature on the field should be consulted.

Criterion-related validity is examined by comparing the questionnaire with other scales or variables. It encompasses Concurrent validity, which is relevant to identify existing attributes, and Predictive validity, which is used to predict future outcomes.

Construct validity is concerned which determining the extent to which a scale measures the theoretical construct in question. It encompasses Convergent validity, which involves exploring whether evidence from different methods indicates the same meaning of a construct, and Discriminant validity, which investigates whether unrelated constructs are uncorrelated.

Cross validation is when the test is administered to a different set of respondents than those the final version will be administered to. It is important to establish the questionnaire’s validity with different samples in order to control against random sampling errors.

The following methods were used as they were deemed crucial for the validation of ETIX; concurrent, consequential and construct validity.


6.1.	Concurrent Validity
Concurrent validity allows a new method to be validated against a tried and tested one. If two tests that are believed to measure closely related attributes correlate strongly, then the new method can be deemed valid. Concurrent validity relies on the two tests being taken at the same time or with little time between them so that the correlation is pure and unaltered by changes over time.

Concurrent validity for ETIX was established using the Counterproductive Work Behavior Checklist (CWB-C, Spector, Bauer and Fox, 2010). All respondents took both ETIX and CWB-C at the same time. The CWB-C is comprised of 45 items, which ask the respondent to indicate how often they engage in certain counterproductive work behaviours. The CWB-C contains two dimensions; Organizational and Person, and five sub-groups which contributed to the dimensions: Abuse (negative behaviours which can affect others), Sabotage (destroying the work environment), Theft (stealing), Withdrawal (avoiding work), and Product Deviance (purposely making errors at work). The Organizational group refers to any counterproductive work behaviour which can cause harm to the organisation, while the Person
 
group refers to any behaviour which can cause harm to individuals. Table 18 shows the correlation between the ETIX factors and the CWB-C dimensions.


Table 18. Correlation Between ETIX Factors and the CWB-C Dimensions.

ETIX factors	CWB-C dimensions	
	Organisational	Person
Respect for Goods and Property	0.58	0.43
Respect for Facts and Honesty	0.54	0.43
Respect for Laws and Procedures	0.48	0.37
Respect for Equality	0.41	0.37
Respect for Other people	0.49	0.42
Respect for Commitments	0.58	0.39

There are good correlations between the CWB-C groups and the ETIX factors, as they range from .37 to 0.58. The correlations between the Organizational group from the CWB-C and ETIX factors range from 0.40 to 0.58, whereas the correlations between the Person group of CWB-C and the ETIX factors range from 0.37 to 0.43, indicating that there are stronger correlations between the ETIX factors and CWB-C’s Organizational group. This finding supports the idea that the ETIX assessment intends to measure likelihood of engaging in behaviours that are considered harmful to an organisation instead of harmful to other individuals.

Furthermore, as shown in Tables 19 and 20, there is a good correlation of 0.53 between the two scales’ global scores, and good correlations that range from 0.38 and 0.51 between the facets and factors of the ETIX and the CWB-C global score.


Table 19. CWB-C Global Score Correlated with ETIX Factors.

Goods	Facts	Laws	Equality	People	Comm
0.51	0.49	0.42	0.38	0.45	0.50

Goods – Goods and Property ◦ Facts – Facts and Honesty ◦ Laws – Laws and Procedures ◦ People– Other People
◦	Comm– Commitments
 
Table 20. CWB-C Global Score Correlated with ETIX Facets.

CS	CO	GO	GS	FS	FO	LS	LO	ES	EO	PS	PO
0.48	0.42	0.44	0.45	0.38	0.41	0.41	0.36	0.25	0.21	0.33	0.33

C.S – Commitment Self ◦ C.O – Commitment Others ◦ G.S – Goods and Property Self ◦ G.O – Goods and Property Others ◦ F.S – Facts and Honesty Self ◦ F.O – Facts and Honesty Others ◦ L.S – Laws and
Procedures Self ◦ L.O – Laws and Procedures Others ◦ E.S –Equality Self ◦ E.O – Equality Others ◦ P.S – Other People Self ◦ P.O – Other People Others


6.2.	Construct Validity
Construct validity measures the degree to which a test measures what it claims to measure. Construct validity is essential to the overall validity (perceived and actual) of a scale. When a construct is not clearly defined, direct inferences are unable to be made between construct and other behaviours (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955). Often there is no accepted unit of measurement for constructs and even fairly well-known ones, such as intelligence, are open to debate. The construct validity of a scale may therefore be threatened if a construct is: a) either too broad or too narrow; b) mislabelled as a specific dimension of or component within the construct; c) confounded by other related constructs that mask the effects of the main construct; or d) developed with insufficient research. Therefore, in order to develop a scale that measures work-based interests, the construct must reflect known theories that define interests, identify the components that comprises it and pin point positive and negative behaviours associated with each dimension.

Construct validity is particularly important for work-based tests, as it adds legitimacy and acceptability to the standardised measurement of employee behaviour. Construct validity also facilitates an understanding of organisational implications of findings, while enabling organisations and individuals to tailor interventions to meet desired performance targets. Two approaches were used to established construct validity in ETIX test: subscale inter-correlations and confirmatory factor analysis.

6.2.1.	Inter-factor Correlations

Correlations were run between the ETIX factors to explore the relationship between them. Results are shown in Table 21.


Table 21. Correlation Between ETIX Factors.

Factors	Goods	Facts	Laws	Equality	People	Commitments
Respect for Goods and
Procedures	1.00					
Respect for Facts and
Honesty	0.82	1.00				
Respect for Laws and Procedures	0.80	0.83	1.00			
Respect for Equality	0.60	0.68	0.64	1.00		
 
Respect for Other People	0.67	0.72	0.70	0.70	1.00	
Respect for Commitments	0.77	0.74	0.68	0.53	0.63	1.00

Goods – Goods and Property ◦ Facts – Facts and Honesty ◦ Laws – Laws and Procedures ◦ People– Other People

As illustrated in Table 20, there are strong correlations between ETIX factors ranging from .53 to .83. Respect for Goods and Property, Respect for Facts and Honesty, and Respect for Laws and Procedures all highly correlate with each other (.80 to .83). This implies that if a respondent scores highly on one of these factors then it is likely that they will also score highly on the other two, and vice versa; this could be due to the fact that if you follow the laws and procedures of the company you are also unlikely to steal or manipulate information because that would involve breaking the organisation’s rules.

Although all correlations between the factors remain above .50, the correlations between Respect for Equality and all other factors are generally lower. This could be due to people accepting a lack of equality more than other factors and therefore scoring lower on it. People are more likely to score higher on factors where there is a clear right or wrong, e.g. Respect for Laws and Procedures, compared to factors that could be more ambiguously interpreted, e.g. Respect for Equality.

6.2.2.	Inter-facet Correlations

The choice to discriminate between people’s attitudes towards their own behaviours and other people’s behaviours was made in the early stages of test development. This decision was made to see if people’s attitudes towards their own behaviours and others behaviour in regard to counter productive work behaviours differed. A correlation between the facets can be found in Table 22 and a dependent t-test illustrating the findings in Table 23.


Table 22. Correlation Between ETIX Facets.

	C.S	C.O	G.S	G.O	F.S	F.O	L.S	L.O	E.S	E.O	P.S	P.O
C.S	1.00											
C.O	0.80	1.00										
G.S	0.75	0.65	1.00									
G.O	0.72	0.71	0.89	1.00								
F.S	0.71	0.63	0.79	0.75	1.00							
F.O	0.70	0.68	0.78	0.79	0.88	1.00						
L.S	0.63	0.60	0.76	0.72	0.78	0.74	1.00					
L.O	0.63	0.61	0.74	0.76	0.76	0.80	0.83	1.00				
 
E.S	0.52	0.50	0.59	0.58	0.67	0.66	0.58	0.63	1.00			
E.O	0.47	0.47	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.87	1.00		
P.S	0.60	0.58	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.68	0.65	1.00	
P.O	0.55	0.59	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.67	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.85	1.00

C.S – Commitment Self ◦ C.O – Commitment Others ◦ G.S – Goods and Property Self ◦ G.O – Goods and Property Others ◦ F.S – Facts and Honesty Self ◦ F.O – Facts and Honesty Others ◦ L.S – Laws and
Procedures Self ◦ L.O – Laws and Procedures Others ◦ E.S – Equality Self ◦ E.O – Equality Others ◦ P.S – Other People Self ◦ P.O – Other People Others

The correlations in this table are high between all facets (.47-.88), which indicates a strong link between participants’ responses across all factors. All correlations between facets of the same factor are above .83, which indicates a very strong inter-facet correlation for all factors. It therefore seems that participants’ attitudes and responses are similar for what they deem acceptable for other people to do and what they find acceptable in their own behaviour. Additionally, this supports the theory that a hypothetical construct, such as a global Work Ethics score, could exist. To test potential differences between the facets, a dependent t-test was performed. Afterwards, the results of a confirmatory factor analysis are shown to explore the underlying construct and model of the test and verify that ETIX factors and facets are independent from each other.


Table 23. Dependent T-test Between ETIX Self and Others Facets.

Factor	Self		Others		Sig	t
	Mean	SD	Mean	SD		
Goods and Property	6.88	2.18	6.62	2.20	4.40	.000
Facts and Honesty	6.57	2.28	6.71	2.11	-2.22	.027
Laws and Procedures	5.89	2.04	6.34	2.10	-6.67	.000
Equality	6.51	1.94	6.48	2.22	0.38	.706
Other People	6.29	1.90	6.40	1.86	-1.88	.060
Commitments	6.14	2.02	6.04	1.99	1.30	.195

After conducting dependent t-tests for all factors, results showed that there were no significant differences between the facets of Self and Others for the factors Equality (p=.706), Other People (p=.060) and Commitments (p=.195) (see table 23). This indicates that respondents’ attitudes towards their own behaviour and other people’s behaviour are similar when it comes to the factors Equality, Other People and Commitments. As a result, they would justify or reject such behaviours independently of who committed them (themselves or others).
 
A significant difference between Self and Others was found for the factors Facts and Honesty (p=.027), and Laws and Procedures (p=.001), with candidates obtaining higher scores on Others than on Self. In other words, people would more easily justify acts of corruption or of manipulation of information in themselves than if other people commit them. An explanation for this type of discrepancy is called the correspondence bias. The correspondence bias is a tendency to attribute one’s own behaviour to the circumstances, but other people’s to their personality. According to this perspective, when people judge others misbehaving, they look for internal causes and may perceive the act as morally wrong, while they may justify their own misbehaviour by blaming external factors.

However, this was not found to be true with the factor Goods and Property. A significant difference was found between the two facets (p=.001), whereby respondents generally obtained a higher score on Self than on Others, indicating that people might be more willing to accept theft committed by others than by themselves. This could be due to people finding it acceptable for others who find themselves in desperate situations to steal, but perhaps, unable to imagine themselves in a similarly dire situation, they can less easily envision a way to justify committing theft.

6.2.3.	Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA)

To investigate the theoretical constructs or factors that may be represented by a set of items as well as the quality of individual items, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) are usually performed. EFA and CFA are both forms of factor analysis. Factor analysis analyses the factors (hypothetical constructs) of an assessment which are developed to interpret clusters of strong inter-correlations between items in a correlation matrix. Factor analysis aims to simplify a range of items into a few common variables; these can be identified by extracting and grouping items which have high correlations on a factor to reveal common variables.

The goal of EFA is to identify and maximise the importance of each dimension (percentage of variance), while CFA is a hypothesis driven approach that determines the degree to which observed indicators reflect the underlying construct by specifying the number of dimensions expected and then classifying the value of expected relationships (Schreiber, Nora, Stage, Barlow, & King, 2006). In doing so, CFA provides a numerical estimate of the degree to which the proposed factor structure is an accurate fit of the phenomenon in the real world. CFA therefore investigated the degree to which measures of a construct are consistent with established understanding and theoretical arguments for that construct.

A confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with continuous factor indicators was conducted in order to check the convergence of the results with the model of the assessment. CFA is a form of factor analysis used to measure that a construct is consistent with its intended meaning. There are two key approaches to confirming the factor structure of a scale. A strict confirmatory approach is one in which a model is tested using structural modelling (SEM) goodness of fit tests to determine if the model specified by the research is consistent with the data. On the other hand, an alternative models approach allows two or more models to be tested to identify which has the best fit. For the development of ETIX, a strict confirmatory approach was adopted as there is only one formulated model for ETIX. ETIX is polytomous in nature, meaning that the items are restricted but not binary, and therefore it lends itself well to CFA. This also helped confirm the existence of a global ETIX score.

CFA is used to determine how well the model fits the data, and therefore evaluating the goodness of fit indices is crucial. Several statistical tests are used to determine how well the model fits the data in CFA and SEM. The closer fit indices meet statistical requirements, the better the model. The Chi Square (X²) statistic is considered the primary index of goodness-of-fit. However, due to problems associated with reliance on the X² (sensitivity to sample sizes and inappropriateness when distributional assumptions are violated), measures of relative fit are strongly recommended. The X² is a measure of
 
absolute fit, and provides a fundamental indication of how well the proposed theory fits the data and does not rely on comparison with a baseline model (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1993).

For the validation of ETIX, the Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA, Steiger & Lind, 1980), the Bentler Comparative Fit Index (CFI), and the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI) were chosen as additional measures of fit, as they are the least likely to be affected by sample size (Fan, Thompson, & Wang, 1999). Furthermore, using a variety of indices is necessary as different indices reflect different aspects of model fit (Hooper, Coughlan, & Mullen, 2008). Like the X², the RMSEA is a measure of absolute fit that assesses the amount of error associated with a proposed model. The lower the RMSEA, the more robust the model; indices of .005 – .075 are considered to be a good fit (Hu & Bentler, 1999). This is because RMSEA is related to the residuals in the model and assesses the degree to which the proposed model is inaccurate. Both the CFI and TLI are incremental or relative fit indices that assess overall improvement of a proposed model compared with an independence model where observed variables are uncorrelated (Hooper et al. 2008; Holtzman & Vezzu, 2011). While higher values of the CFI and TLI (.9 and above) indicate good fit, it should be noted that a CFI or TLI of .90 or higher may not correspond to a RMSEA of .05 or less (Hu & Bentler, 1999).

Four CFA analyses were conducted in order to distinguish the difference between factors and facets: the first included the 6 factors, the second was broken down into the 12 facets, and the third and fourth analyses explored the facets Self and Others individually. Table 25 shows the goodness of fit indices model results.


Table 24. 6 Factor Analysis.

CFA	N	X2	df	X2/df	p	RMSEA	low 90% C.I.	high 90% C.I.	CFI	TLI
	306	14624.568	7005	2.077	0.000	0.060	0.058	0.061	0.659	0.653


Table 25. 12 Facet Analysis.

CFA	N	X2	df	X2/df	p	RMSEA	low 90% C.I.	high 90% C.I.	CFI	TLI
	306	14388.380	6954	2.058	0.000	0.059	0.057	0.06	0.667	0.658


Table 26. Self Facet Analysis.

CFA	N	X2	df	X2/df	p	RMSEA	low 90% C.I.	high 90% C.I.	CFI	TLI
	306	3185.824	1695	1.879	0.000	0.056	0.055	0.057	0.817	0.809
 
Table 27. Other Facet Analysis.

CFA	N	X2	df	X2/df	p	RMSEA	low 90% C.I.	high 90% C.I.	CFI	TLI
	306	3118.309	1695	1.839	0.000	0.054	0.051	0.056	0.825	0.817

The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) confirmed that the 6 factors are independent of each other in measuring the construct of counterproductive work behaviour (CWB). CFA also confirmed that the 12 facets are independent of each other while measuring CWB. CFA on the two facets, Self and Others, separately revealed that they are independent of one another and both measure the construct effectively. As all four CFAs are significant (p<.00), it can be concluded that there is no relationship between the variables investigated.

CFA converged on all four analyses, meaning that the construct measured in ETIX is therefore applicable in ‘real world’ situations. The fact that the analyses converged also demonstrates that ETIX does not measure external factors or other related constructs, and instead it only measures what it intended to.

6.3.	Consequential Validity
Consequential validity refers to what happens to assessment results when used and interpreted in a ‘real-life context’. It is of particular importance to take this into account due to the potentially negative consequences and misinterpretations that can arise from an assessment of this nature. Consequential validity was established by running various analyses to measure the invariance of the questionnaire’s applications across gender, age and study level. Scores should be interpreted with care when there is a significant difference between groups (p<.05).

6.3.1.	Measurement Equivalence

Measurement equivalence (ME) refers to the consistency of measurement across specified group demarcation, such as nationality, ethnicity and gender. The focus of ME is to ensure that individuals from different groups with the same score on a trait have the same set of observations on an assessment (Drasgow, 1984; McLeary & Cruise, 2012). Understanding ME is important in an assessment to establish confidence, validity and equivalence across groups. ME is obtained when candidates from different cultural backgrounds, age groups, ethnicities, genders and occupational groups with the same level on a trait, have an equal chance of being selected for a role that requires the desired level on this trait. ME helps to determine the extent to which respondents are interpreting items similarly, and identified differences across groups reflect actual differences in the trait being measured (Drasgow, 1984). One approach to assessing measurement equivalence is differential item functioning analysis.

6.3.2.	Differential Item Functioning

An item functions differently, or displays differential item functioning (DIF), if respondents from different groups have different probabilities of endorsing the item, despite having the same level of the trait. When a different probability of endorsing an item remains constant across different levels of the trait, the DIF is said to be uniform (Figure 2). Here, the item of interest consistently gives one group an advantage across all levels of the trait, even when the groups are matched on ability. Conversely, when a different probability of endorsing an item varies along the level of the trait, the DIF is characterised as non-uniform (Clauser & Mazor, 1998; Hanson, 1998). Rather than a consistent
 
advantage being given to the reference group across the ability continuum, an advantage to one group over another exists at different levels of the trait. For instance, an item may give the reference group an advantage at the higher end of the continuum, while a disadvantage at the lower end (Figure 3).



Figure 2. Item characteristic curve with uniform
DIF.	Figure 3. Item characteristic curve with non-
uniform DIF.


Traditionally testing for the presence of DIF under the logistic regression framework is based on likelihood ratio χ2 test (Swaminathan & Rogers, 1990). Initially used for dichotomous items, this technique was then extended for polytomous items1, in which case the proportional-odds logistic regression model (Agresti, 1990) is used.

The logistic regression procedure, as used in ETIX to assess DIF, focuses on one item after the other, looking for difference between groups when participants are matched on similar level of trait. The matching criterion is the IRT score of each factor.

For each item, different nested models are fit to the data to test the null hypotheses (no difference between the groups) and the alternative hypotheses (a: there is a difference between groups or b: there is a difference between groups, and this difference is not constant across all trait levels):

Model 0: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk
Model 1: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk + β1 * trait level
Model 2: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk + β1 * trait level + β2 *group
Model 3: logit P(ui ≥ k) = αk + β1 * trait level + β2 *group + β2 * trait level * group

Where P(ui ≥ k) is the cumulative probabilities that the item response falls in response option k or higher, and αk are the intercepts.

The log-likelihood of each of the 3 models are recorded. Uniform DIF (degrees of freedom (df) = 1) is tested by comparing the log likelihood values for Model 1 and Model 2, non-uniform DIF (df = 1) by comparing Model 2 and Model 3, and the global overall DIF (df = 2) effect by comparing Model 1 and Model 3. These comparisons are performed with the likelihood ratio X2 statistic.

1 Data is polytomous when item levels are available in multiple categories (ordinal and interval), whereas dichotomous assessments have items with only two levels (binary).
 
Criteria for detecting DIF:

Items were flagged as DIF if any of the three likelihood ratio X2 statistics was significant. Significance level was fixed at alpha =.01 (due to multiple comparison). Moreover, Cox and Snell (1989), Nagelkerke (1991), and McFadden (Menard, 2000) pseudo R2 were reported as a magnitude effects. The level of the effect size provided by the difference between the R2 coefficients of the nested models were classified as "negligible" (<.13), "moderate" (.13 to .26) or "large" (>.26) based on Zumbo and Thomas’ (1997) scale of DIF effect.

Purification process:

Ordinal logistic regression uses IRT factor scores as a matching criterion for detecting DIF, assuming that all items except the item of interest are DIF free. Iterative purification is a process used in order to determine whether the IRT factor score was already biased prior to running an ordinal logistic regression analysis, due to items with DIF being included in the scale. It iteratively recalculates the matching criterion and the DIF, by using just the items which are identified as non-DIF. Iterative purification therefore reduces the effect of DIF on the factor estimates which are used for matching criterion (Choi, Gibbons & Crane, 2011).

Gender, study level and age differences were separately subjected to Dif analyses for each factor. Analyses were performed using R software version 3.1.3 and the lordif package for R (Choi, Gibbons & Crane, 2011).

6.3.3.	DIF Analysis: Gender

In order to discover if items performed differently across gender, we first defined two groups of professionals by gender (males and females). These analyses were conducted to ensure that all of the items were interpreted in the same way by participants of either gender, and that there was not a bias towards either males or females.

6.3.3.a.	DIF Analysis: Participants

Analyses were conducted with a total of 320 participants all from the UK norm sample. Participants were separated in two groups according to their gender. 168 women (53%) aged from 21 to 65 years (M=43.80; SD=10.8) and 152 men (47%) aged from 23 to 65 years (M=43.62; SD=10.3) were included in the analysis.

6.3.3.b.	DIF Analysis: Results

Analyses identified 2 items relating to Respect for Commitments, 3 for Equality, 1 for Goods and Property and 2 items for Laws and Procedures displaying a general DIF effect for gender, due to the presence of non-uniform DIF for all items, and the presence of uniform and non-uniform DIF in the Goods and Property and Laws and Procedures items. However, the size of the effects, as indicated by the pseudo R2, were negligible: <.02, which is far below Zumbo’s (1999) threshold of .13 indicating a negligible size effect.

No DIF was flagged for the factors Facts and Honesty, and Other People. The results of these analyses show that the majority of items (132 out of 140) on ETIX do not function differently across genders. Table 27 shows the Likelihood Ratio X2 Statistics for this analysis; all items with demonstrated DIF have been included in this table. Uniform DIF is displayed as χ212, while non-uniform DIF is displayed as χ223, and global DIF is displayed as χ213.
 
Table 28. Likelihood Ratio X2 for Uniform (R212), Non-Uniform (R223) and Global (R213) DIF and Magnitude Measures for Each Item which Demonstrates DIF across Genders (alpha = .01).


Probability	McFadden		Nagelkerke		Cox & Snell		


%Δβ1
Factor	Item	No cat	Χ212	Χ213	Χ223	R212	R213	R223	R212	R213	R223	R212	R213	R223	
C	15	4	0.641	0.001	0.000	0.000	0.016	0.016	0.001	0.039	0.038	0.001	0.035	0.035	0.011
C	20	4	0.813	0.015	0.004	0.000	0.010	0.010	0.000	0.021	0.020	0.000	0.019	0.019	0.004
E	1	4	0.410	0.000	0.000	0.001	0.022	0.021	0.001	0.019	0.018	0.001	0.018	0.017	0.011
E	8	4	0.572	0.012	0.004	0.000	0.011	0.010	0.001	0.016	0.015	0.001	0.015	0.015	0.009
E	12	4	0.568	0.002	0.000	0.000	0.016	0.015	0.001	0.022	0.021	0.001	0.020	0.019	0.009
G	1	4	0.001	0.004	0.871	0.014	0.014	0.000	0.017	0.017	0.000	0.016	0.016	0.000	0.060
L	4	4	0.006	0.020	0.641	0.010	0.010	0.000	0.014	0.015	0.000	0.013	0.014	0.000	0.060
L	14	4	0.000	0.000	0.749	0.025	0.026	0.000	0.050	0.051	0.000	0.046	0.047	0.000	0.053

C – Commitments ◦ E – Equality ◦ G – Goods and Property ◦ L – Laws and Procedures

One item displaying DIF was chosen to graphically illustrate DIF in ETIX with relation to gender. Figure 4 displays analyses of the one item for Commitments, which has negligible gender differences. The reference group (males) is more likely to endorse the item (Figure 4) than the focal group (females).
 
 

Figure 4. Graphical Display of an Item “If I was offered a better opportunity elsewhere, I would not
feel I had to give much advance warning.” for the Factor Commitments which Illustrates Non-Uniform DIF with Respect to Gender. Reference Group = Men, Focal Group = Women.

The top left graph displays the item characteristic curves (ICCs) for the item for male (solid curve) vs. female (dotted curve) professionals based on item true-score functions. The Logistic Regression χ2 test for uniform DIF (χ212) was not significant (p=.813), whereas non uniform DIF (χ223) was significant (p=.0154). The slope of the function for males was slightly higher than that for females at a high theta level, whereas it was higher for females than males at a lower theta level, further indicating a non- uniform DIF.

The top right and the bottom right graphs both show the absolute difference between the ICCs for male and female professionals. The top right graph illustrates the difference in scores between groups along the continuum of trait level (theta score), and shows that the small difference in item true score function is present only at low and high level of the trait Commitments. The bottom right graph shows this same difference in score between groups but weighted by the score distribution of the focal group, thus indicating that the impact of the difference between the item score of the two groups is actually minimal.

The bottom left graph shows the item response functions for the two groups separately for each response options. Slope (discrimination parameter) and category threshold values (difficulty parameters at the intersection of categories response options) are printed on the left of the graph. Difference between groups on the slope parameters (1.47 for men, .74 for women) is an indicator of non-uniform DIF, which is confirmed by the visual inspection of the graph “item true score function” (top left figure). The category threshold values, calculated for each group, indicate at which point of the response option the difference between groups occurs. For this item, category threshold value
 
differs between groups at the intersection of response option “Strongly agree” and “Somewhat agree” (-1.42 for men and -2.42 for women): as the items in ETIX have reversed coding (“Strongly disagree” with the item results in a higher ethical score than “Strongly agree” meaning that the curve from left to right of the graph corresponds to “Strongly agree”, “Somewhat agree”, “Somewhat disagree” and “Strongly disagree” respectively), the probability of endorsing the “Strongly agree” over the “Somewhat agree” option for men starts at lower level of trait compared to women. Category threshold value also differs between groups at the intersection of response option “Somewhat disagree” and “Strongly disagree” (1.58 for men, 3.14 for women): the probability of endorsing the “Strongly disagree” over the “Somewhat disagree” option for men starts at lower level of trait compared to women.



Figure 5. Trait Distributions for the Factor	Figure 6. Trait Distributions for the Factor Commitments – Male Reference) vs. Female (Focal).		Equality – Male (Reference) vs. Female
(Focial).



 
Figure 7. Trait Distributions for the Factor Goods and Property – Male (Reference) vs. Female (Focal).
 
Figure 8. Trait Distributions for the Factor Laws and Procedures – Male (Reference) vs. Female (Focal).
 
At the trait level, the distribution of theta scores for the factor Commitments is illustrated in Figure 5. This graph shows the distribution of the theta score for males (solid line) and females (dotted line) participants. We can observe a broad overlap in the distributions, though more females compared to males obtain medium theta estimates. Regarding the factors Equality (Figure 6), Goods and Property (Figure 7), Laws and Procedures (Figure 8), we can observe a broad overlap in the trait distributions between males (solid line) and females (dotted line), though more males compared to females obtain medium theta estimates.

Importantly, as displayed in Figure 9, the test characteristic curves for the factors Commitments, Equality, Goods and Property and Laws and Procedures show a perfect overlap between groups, indicating that for all level of trait, the item with DIF had no impact on the theta estimated scores at the factor level.


Factor Commitments	Factor Equality



Factor Goods and Property	Factor of Laws and Procedures

Figure 9. Impact of All Items for the Factor Commitments (All Items - Top Left), Equality (All Items - Top Right), Goods and Property (All Items - Bottom Left), and Laws and Procedures (All Items - Bottom
 
Right) on Test Characteristic Curves (TCCs), with Male Professionals (reference) Represented by a Solid Curve, and Female Professionals (focal) Represented by a Dotted Curve.

Finally, the non-significant impact of the DIF item on the level of trait for factor Commitments, Equality, Goods and Property, and Laws and Procedures is confirmed by the comparison between theta factor score estimated on all items (including items with DIF) and the theta score estimated without DIF items (see Figure 10).



Factor Commitments	Factor Equality

Factor Goods and Property	Factor Laws and Procedures

Figure 10. Individual-level DIF Impact.

The graphs above compare the initial theta estimate (which include DIF items) and the purified theta estimates from the final run accounting for DIF. The median difference over all respondents which is represented by the thick black line on the left graph at roughly 0.00. The box and whisker plots all illustrate an interquartile range (the shaded box), ranging from roughly -0.01 to +0.01. The solid line on the scatterplot illustrates where the median would be if there was no DIF, a dotted line depicts the mean of differences and it is evident that the DIF on these factors is extremely small.
 
Conclusion: Overall, the results of DIF analyses for gender showed that only 8 items out of 140 displayed a DIF effect with only a negligible size effect. Moreover, the impact of the 8 items with DIF on the IRT factor score of their respective dimension was non-significant. Therefore, we can conclude that ETIX questionnaire is appropriate for use for both male and female professionals without causing any discrimination, and practitioners can be confident of obtaining valid, representative and fair results from its use.

6.3.4.	DIF Analysis: Age

In order to discover if items performed differently across gender, we first defined two groups of professionals by age; one group consisted of those aged under 50 and the other of those aged 50 and over.

6.3.4.a.	DIF Analysis: Participants

Younger professionals were used as the reference group and comprised of 218 participants (51% women) aged from 21 to 49 years (M=37.9; SD=7.1). The focal group included 102 participants (56% women) aged from 50 to 65 years (M=56.05; SD=4.3) and were classified as older professionals.

6.3.4.b.	DIF Analysis: Results

Analyses flagged 4 items relating to Equality, 3 for Facts and Honesty, 1 for Goods and Property and 1 item for Laws and Procedures with a DIF effect for age. 1 item for Equality displayed a non-uniform DIF effect, while the other items displayed both a uniform and a non-uniform DIF (Table 28). No DIF was identified for the factors Commitments and Other People. Table 28 shows the Likelihood Ratio DIF statistics for this analysis; all items with demonstrated DIF have been included in this table. The results of these analyses show that the majority of items (131 out of 140) on ETIX do not function differently across age groups.


Table 29. Likelihood Ratio X2 for Uniform (R212), Non-Uniform (R223) and Global (R213) DIF and Magnitude Measures for Each Item which Demonstrates DIF across Age Groups (alpha = .01).

All items with demonstrated DIF have been included in this table.

Probability	McFadden		Nagelkerke	Cox & Snell	


%Δβ1
Factor	Item	No. cat	Χ212	Χ213	Χ223	R212	R213	R223	R212	R213	R223	R212	R213	R223	
E	1	4	0.00
2	0.00
1	0.03
8	0.01
2	0.01
7	0.00
5	0.01
1	0.01
6	0.00
5	0.01
0	0.01
4	0.00
4	0.028
E	2	4	0.00
4	0.01
3	0.44
4	0.01
0	0.01
1	0.00
1	0.02
1	0.02
2	0.00
2	0.01
9	0.02
0	0.00
1	0.004
E	5	4	0.59
3	0.00
6	0.00
2	0.00
0	0.01
3	0.01
2	0.00
1	0.02
1	0.02
0	0.00
1	0.01
9	0.01
8	0.000
E	11	4	0.00
0	0.00
1	0.12
1	0.01
6	0.01
9	0.00
3	0.01
5	0.01
7	0.00
3	0.01
3	0.01
6	0.00
3	0.043
F	19	4	0.00
7	0.02
3	0.72
6	0.01
0	0.01
0	0.00
0	0.01
0	0.01
1	0.00
0	0.01
0	0.01
0	0.00
0	0.035
F	20	4	0.00
1	0.00
6	0.68
7	0.01
5	0.01
5	0.00
0	0.01
3	0.01
3	0.00
0	0.01
1	0.01
2	0.00
0	0.012
 

G	16	4	0.00
3	0.01
2	0.94
3	0.01
3	0.01
3	0.00
0	0.01
6	0.01
6	0.00
0	0.01
5	0.01
5	0.00
0	0.047
L	1	4	0.04
3	0.00
3	0.00
6	0.00
5	0.01
4	0.00
9	0.00
8	0.02
2	0.01
4	0.00
7	0.02
0	0.01
3	0.002

E – Equality ◦ F – Facts and Honesty ◦ G – Goods and Property ◦ L – Laws and Procedures

Factor Equality	Factor Facts and Honesty


Factor Goods and Property	Factor Laws and Procedures

Figure 11. Trait Distributions for the Factors Respect for Equality (Top Left), Facts and Honesty (Top Right), Goods and Property (Bottom Left), and Laws and Procedures (Bottom Right) – Younger (Reference) vs. Older (Focal) Professionals.

At the trait level, the distributions of the estimated theta scores for Respect for Equality, Facts and Honesty, Goods and Properties, and Laws and Procedures are very similar across both age groups and broadly overlap, though a higher number of younger professionals obtained medium score estimates, compared to older professionals (see Figure 11).
 
Importantly, as displayed in Figure 12, the test characteristic curves for the factor Respect for Equality, Facts and Honesty, Goods and Property, and Laws and Procedures show a perfect overlap between groups, indicating that for all level of trait, the item with DIF has no impact on the theta estimated score at the factor level.


Factor Equality	Factor Facts and Honesty


Factor Goods and Property	Factor Laws and Procedures


Figure 12. Test Characteristic Curves (TCCs) for the Factors Equality, Facts and Honesty, Goods and Property, and Laws and Procedures.

The left graph for each factor shows the TCC for all 20 items of each factor, with younger professionals (reference) represented by a solid curve, and older professionals (focal) represented by a dotted curve. The graph on the right illustrates TCC only for the items identified with DIF for age.
 
Conclusion: Overall, only 9 items out of the 140 items of ETIX questionnaire were flagged with DIF for age. These DIF items, which relate to the factors Respect for Equality, Respect for Facts and Honesty, Respect for Goods and Property, and Respect for Laws and Procedures, had a small size effect and no significant impact on theta score estimated at the factor level. In other words, items with DIF did not produce any difference between groups at the trait level. Therefore, we can conclude that ETIX questionnaire is appropriate for use for professionals regardless of their age without causing any discrimination, and practitioners can be confident of obtaining valid, representative and fair results from its use.

6.3.5.	DIF Analysis: Study Level

In order to discover if items performed differently across study level, we first defined two groups of professionals; one group consisted of those with a Bachelor’s, Master’s or PhD degree and the other of those with trades training or no study, a high school diploma and those with 2 years vocational study.

6.3.5.a.	DIF Analysis: Participants

University level professionals were used as the reference group and comprised of 140 participants (54% men) aged from 21 to 44 years (M=40.8; SD=10.3). The focal group included 180 participants (57% women) aged from 25 to 63 years (M=46; SD=10.2) and were classified as working professionals.

6.3.5.b.	DIF Analysis: Results

Analyses flagged 8 items with DIF out of the 140 items included in the ETIX questionnaire: 1 item relating to Facts and Honesty, 2 items from Equality and 3 items from Laws and Procedures displayed both a uniform and a non-uniform DIF for educational level, while 1 item from Equality and 1 item for Laws and Procedures displayed a non-uniform DIF (Table 29). No DIF was identified for the factors Commitments, Goods and Property, and Other People.


Table 30. Likelihood Ratio X2 for Uniform (R212), Non-Uniform (R223) and Global (R213) DIF and Magnitude Measures for Each Item which Demonstrates DIF across Study Levels (alpha = .01).

All items with demonstrated DIF have been included in this table.

Probability	McFadden		Nagelkerke	Cox & Snell	


%Δβ1
Factor	Item	No. cat	Χ212	Χ213	Χ223	R212	R213	R223	R212	R213	R223	R212	R213	R223	
E	3	4	0.00
3	0.01
2	0.79
6	0.01
1	0.01
1	0.00
0	0.01
2	0.01
3	0.00
0	0.01
1	0.01
2	0.00
0	0.025
E	12	4	0.00
5	0.01
8	0.65
7	0.01
0	0.01
0	0.00
0	0.01
3	0.01
4	0.00
0	0.01
2	0.01
3	0.00
0	0.021
E	14	4	0.07
9	0.00
4	0.00
5	0.00
4	0.01
4	0.01
0	0.00
7	0.02
4	0.01
7	0.00
6	0.02
2	0.01
6	0.000
F	20	4	0.00
4	0.00
1	0.02
0	0.01
2	0.02
0	0.00
8	0.01
1	0.01
7	0.00
7	0.01
0	0.01
5	0.00
6	0.003
L	1	4	0.55
7	0.00
4	0.00
1	0.00
0	0.01
4	0.01
3	0.00
1	0.02
1	0.02
0	0.00
1	0.02
0	0.01
9	0.007
 

L	4	4	0.00
2	0.00
0	0.00
4	0.01
2	0.02
2	0.01
0	0.01
9	0.03
4	0.01
5	0.01
7	0.03
1	0.01
4	0.044
L	14	4	0.00
3	0.00
2	0.05
8	0.01
1	0.01
6	0.00
4	0.02
3	0.03
1	0.00
9	0.02
1	0.02
9	0.00
8	0.008
L	18	4	0.00
4	0.00
2	0.06
0	0.01
1	0.01
5	0.00
5	0.01
5	0.02
1	0.00
6	0.01
4	0.01
9	0.00
6	0.001

E – Equality ◦ F – Facts and Honesty ◦ L – Laws and Procedures


Factor Equality	Factor Facts and Honesty


Factor Laws and Procedures

Figure 13. Theta Estimates Distribution of Both Groups for the Factors Equality, Facts and Honesty and Laws and Procedures. University Level Group (Reference Group - Solid Line) and Working Professional Group (Focal Group - Dotted Line).
 
At the factor score level, Figure 13 shows that theta estimated distribution of both groups broadly overlap for the 3 factors flagged with DIF items, though university level professionals were more represented at medium level of trait compared to working professionals.

Notably, the test characteristic curves of the three factors identified with DIF items (Equality, Fact and Honesty, and Laws and Procedures) show a perfect overlap between groups (left graph for each factor), indicating that for all levels of trait, the items with DIF had no impact on the theta estimated scores (Figure 14).



Factor Equality	Factor Facts and Honesty

Factor Laws and Procedures

Figure 14. Impact of All Items on Test Characteristic Curves (TCCs) for the Factors Equality, Facts and Honesty, Laws and Procedures. University Level Professionals (Reference) are Represented by a Solid Curve and Working Professionals (Focal) by a Dotted Curve.

The graphs on the left illustrate the TCC for the 3 factors for each group, while the graphs on the right illustrate the TCC of the factors for the items flagged with DIF.
 
Overall, 24 out of 140 items were flagged for negligible DIF related to gender, age and study level. It is important to emphasise that the impact of DIF on the TCCs of all dimension was non-significant. This means that the ETIX questionnaire has very high consistency of measurement across gender, age and study level. Therefore, we can conclude that the ETIX questionnaire is appropriate for use with professionals regardless of their educational level, as long as they have had at least a secondary school education (high school level), and regardless of their age or gender, without causing any discrimination. Practitioners can be confident of obtaining valid, representative and fair results from its use. ETIX provides candidates from different genders, age groups and study levels with the same level on a factor, the same chance of being selected for a role that requires the desired level on this factor.

6.3.6.	T-tests and ANOVAs

The DIF analyses demonstrate that ETIX has high consequential validity and, although some items were flagged with DIF, there was a negligible impact on the overall assessment meaning that it does not have bias towards any age group, gender or study level. Therefore, any significant differences found between genders, age groups, or study levels are due to real differences and not biases of the questionnaire. To further explore the differences between the groups, t-tests and ANOVAS were performed between genders, age groups and study levels (see Tables 31-33).

Gender: In order to check for differences in scores between genders, an independent-samples t-test was conducted to compare all ETIX factors and facets between females (n=161) and males (n=145).


Table 31. Independent T-test Between Females and Males on ETIX.


Factors	
Males		
Females		
t	
Sig

N=306	
Mean	
SD	
Mean	
SD		

Good and Property	
6.42	
2.25	
7.03	
1.96	
-2.53	
.012

Self	
6.53	
2.32	
7.18	
1.99	
-2.60	
.010

Others	
6.31	
2.29	
6.89	
2.08	
-2.32	
.021

Facts and Honesty	
6.13	
2.29	
7.10	
1.88	
-4.00	
.000

Self	
6.05	
2.44	
7.04	
2.02	
-3.83	
.000

Others	
6.22	
2.24	
7.16	
1.89	
-3.94	
.000

Laws and Procedures	
5.64	
2.12	
6.54	
1.75	
-4.03	
.000
 
Self	5.42	2.17	6.30	1.83	-3.81	.000

Others	
5.86	
2.23	
6.78	
1.88	
-3.89	
.000

Equality	
6.01	
2.13	
6.93	
1.79	
-4.08	
.000

Self	
6.04	
2.05	
6.92	
1.73	
-4.02	
.000

Others	
5.97	
2.35	
6.94	
1.99	
-3.87	
.000

Other People	
5.74	
1.81	
6.89	
1.63	
-5.82	
.000

Self	
5.70	
1.91	
6.82	
1.72	
-5.40	
.000

Others	
5.78	
1.85	
6.95	
1.70	
-5.75	
.000

Commitments	
5.78	
2.04	
6.36	
1.73	
-2.66	
.008

Self	
5.87	
2.15	
6.38	
1.87	
-2.21	
.028

Others	
5.70	
2.11	
6.35	
1.83	
-2.86	
.005

Females scored significantly higher than males on all ETIX factors and facets (see Table 31). These differences might be due to the deeply rooted societal gender roles wherein women are expected to act nicely, making them more prone to follow the norms, avoid conflicts and respect others, while men are expected to be ambitious and successful, hence making them more prone to bending the norms in order to achieve their goals. However, some studies have shown that gender differences on ethical judgement may not be as significant (Loo, 2003). These results should therefore be interpreted with caution and further investigated.

Age: Participants were separated into four groups according to their age: under 28s (n=22), 28 to 33- year olds (n=43), 34 to 43-year olds (n=90), and over the age of 44 (n=151).


Table 32. One-way ANOVA Between Age Groups.

Factors	Under 28	28-33		34-43		Over 44	F	Sig
N=306	Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD		
Goods and Property	
5.97	
2.21	
6.46	
2.61	
6.44	
2.05	
7.11	
1.92	
3.39	
0.018
 
Self	6.1	2.36	6.74	2.57	6.52	2.12	7.23	1.98	3.15	0.025
Others	5.85	2.16	6.19	2.74	6.36	2.13	7	1.97	3.42	0.018
Facts and Honesty	5.71	2.14	6.44	2.56	6.31	2.05	7.02	1.95	4.44	0.009
Self	5.39	2.16	6.28	2.67	6.27	2.21	7.01	2.1	4.68	0.003
Others	6.03	2.22	6.6	2.56	6.36	2.03	7.04	1.93	2.91	0.035
Laws and Procedures	5.17	1.71	5.81	2.23	5.91	1.88	6.45	1.92	3.14	0.01
Self	4.78	1.61	5.57	2.36	5.69	1.89	6.24	1.99	4.37	0.005
Others	5.57	1.96	6.05	2.29	6.13	2.01	6.66	2.06	2.76	0.042
Equality	6.29	1.99	6.67	2.42	6.42	1.85	6.51	1.96	0.48	0.875
Self	6.17	6.3	1.81	0.47	6.67	7	2.43	0.35	0.57	0.639
Others	6.41	6.8	2.29	0.51	6.68	7.15	2.51	0.41	0.14	0.938
Other People	5.87	1.76	6.34	2.18	6.33	1.71	6.42	1.73	1.47	0.629
Self	5.72	6	2.09	0.45	6.43	6.8	2.26	0.34	0.75	0.521
Others	6.01	6	1.6	0.39	6.25	6.3	2.19	0.33	0.53	0.661
Commitments	5.8	2.06	5.86	2.42	5.81	1.77	6.36	1.73	1.47	0.11
Self	5.97	2.17	5.81	2.53	5.87	1.94	6.41	1.83	2.22	0.085
Others	5.63	2.13	5.9	2.46	5.75	1.86	6.31	1.84	0.84	0.47

As illustrated in Table 31, a one-way ANOVA was conducted to explore the differences between the age groups on ETIX factors and facets. Significant differences were found for Factors Respect for Goods and Property, Respect for Facts and Honesty and Respect for Laws and Procedures as well as all of their corresponding facets. A similar trend can be observed in the aforementioned factors, with the older age group (44 or more) obtaining the highest scores on all factors and facets, while the youngest age group (28 or less) obtained the lowest scores. A possible explanation for this might be that older people tend to lead a financially more secure life than younger people (Miron-Shatz, 2009); consequently they might have a stricter stance on stealing, lying and corruption as they have “more to loose and less to gain” from such behaviours. Another explanation for the present findings could be that as people age, their brain’s cognitive control system changes, improving their capacity for self-regulation, which in turn decreases the impulse towards sensation seeking and risk-taking behaviour (Steinberg, 2008). This might in turn affect the way older people view the counterproductive work behaviours attached to these factors, making them less likely to engage in them.

However, no significant differences were found for the factors Respect for Others, Respect for Equality and Respect for Commitments. This could be due to the fact that these factors are more indirectly
 
related to breaking the rules or the law, and constitute more modern preoccupations, which might balance the differences discussed in the previous paragraph.

Study Level: In order to explore the difference between participants with different levels of education, a one-way ANOVA was conducted. The results are shown in Table 33.


Table 33. One-way ANOVA Between Study Level Groups.


Factor	Trades Training / No studies
(N=28)	High school diploma (N=90)	2 years vocational study (N=57)	Bachelor’s degree (N=100)	
Masters / PhD (N=31)	
F	
Sig
	Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD	Mean	SD		
Goods and Property	
6.4	
1.99	
7.19	
2.09	
7.06	
1.81	
6.4	
2.1	
6.31	
2.55	
2.51	
0.042
Self	6.57	2.08	7.22	2.2	7.15	1.89	6.61	2.18	6.48	2.4	2.74	0.178
Others	6.23	1.98	7.15	2.13	6.97	1.86	6.19	2.16	6.15	2.74	2.04	0.011
Facts and Honesty	6.37	1.91	6.97	2.05	6.78	2	6.48	2.21	6.2	2.34	1.71	0.311
Self	6.46	1.91	6.95	2.24	6.66	2.19	6.38	2.34	6.04	2.45	1.25	0.291
Others	6.29	2.02	6.99	2.03	6.91	1.94	6.58	2.18	6.35	2.33	1.14	0.34
Laws and Procedures	5.76	1.71	6.46	1.91	6.29	1.9	5.9	1.99	5.8	2.29	3.02	0.196
Self	5.53	1.75	6.27	2.03	6.03	1.95	5.64	2.03	5.6	2.29	1.62	0.17
Others	5.99	1.8	6.65	2.04	6.56	2.03	6.16	2.12	5.99	2.38	1.22	0.301
Equality	6.13	1.65	6.53	1.96	6.6	1.91	6.63	2.05	6.07	2.31	2.91	0.56
Self	6.19	1.64	6.62	1.9	6.61	1.82	6.58	1.98	6.02	2.21	0.83	0.511
Others	6.06	1.86	6.44	2.16	6.59	2.13	6.68	2.27	6.12	2.5	0.71	0.588
Other People	5.93	1.35	6.28	1.9	6.85	1.48	6.33	1.81	6.01	2.15	2.2	0.125
Self	5.99	1.56	6.17	1.99	6.83	1.49	6.29	1.93	5.89	2.2	1.79	0.13
Others	5.87	1.41	6.39	1.93	6.87	1.69	6.38	1.82	6.12	2.21	1.68	0.155
Commitments	6.01	1.7	6.35	1.99	6.34	1.7	5.87	1.81	5.63	2.23	2.16	0.216
Self	6.23	1.87	6.39	2.11	6.31	1.81	5.92	1.91	5.69	2.38	1.13	0.345
Others	5.8	1.8	6.3	2.06	6.38	1.87	5.83	1.89	5.57	2.23	1.65	0.161
 
As illustrated in Table 32, there is a significant difference for the factor Respect for Goods and Property (p=.042), and its facet Others (p=.011) depending on the level of education. Those with a Bachelor’s degree obtained the highest scores, and those with a high school diploma obtained the lowest scores. No significant differences were found for any of the other factors or facets.
 
   MOTIVATION+ is a psychometric evaluation tool, designed to analyse an individual’s motivations, values and satisfaction at work. Consisting of 41 questions, it is a useful and relevant tool for recruitment, performance review, career and self-development, training or establishing management policies.

Another version of MOTIVATION+ is MOTIVATION. The difference between the two versions is that MOTIVATION+ has an additional scale to measure an individual’s job satisfaction. While MOTIVATION+ consists of 40 questions assessing an individual’s motivations plus an additional question to assess the individual’s job satisfaction, MOTIVATION consists of only 40 questions evaluating an individual’s motivations.

MOTIVATION+ is especially useful for different processes of companies and organisations such as performance evaluation, personal and professional development, support in intervention programmes and / or for the review of policies. MOTIVATION, on the other hand, is exclusively suitable for the selection and hiring processes.

The assessment provides an in-depth analysis of a candidate's preference for certain values in a working environment, based on 15 fundamental values. The scale was specifically developed to evaluate values at work because a person's behaviours, choices and attitudes are driven by values. Thus, the profiles generated by MOTIVATION+ will help decision-makers optimise the match between individuals and their work, team and organisation.

MOTIVATION+ is validated via a sample of 915 professionals from a variety of occupations, educational levels and age groups. Due to its robust psychological approach and practitioner-based results, the assessment can be utilised by decision-makers in the field of HR, management, work psychology, coaching, training and consulting, worldwide.

There are several features that make MOTIVATION+ especially interesting. These include:

•	Contemporary and business relevant items
•	Compositional / integrative response format with 3 levels
•	Short questionnaire length with only 41 questions
•	Average completion time of 12 minutes
•	Practical and easy-to understand results
•	User-friendly and customisable reports that can be easily tailored
•	Developed in multiple languages simultaneously
•	Valid and reliable, with studies conducted on professionals from multiple countries

In this technical guide & user manual, you will find useful information about the assessment, its development, theoretical background, psychometric properties and practical applications. Chapters 1, 2, 3 and 8 are specifically tailored for HR practitioners whilst chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 consist of detailed technical and psychometric information.
 
1.	General Description and Applicability
MOTIVATION+ provides a comprehensive account of an individual's motivational profile, with insights into what drives them to be more committed, involved, and efficient in their job. The assessment is based on basic individual values, or more precisely, work values, to provide psychologists and HR professionals with an accurate tool to identify what drives and moves an individual at work.

The underlying logic in using work values to understand an individual’s motivation is that they offer a solid theoretical background, low volatility in time and evident inter-individual variations.

The list of the motivators or factors measured in MOTIVATION+ is provided below, along with their definitions. These factors are categorised into their relevant work value groups.

Social Motivators

The work value group 'Social Motivators' encompasses those values that relate to an individual's social surroundings. Consisting of 'Social Environment,' 'Social Utility', 'Idea Sharing', 'Influence' and 'Developing Others,' these values enable a person to build upon and strengthen the social relationships that they have at work, and to help and support others.

1.	Social Environment - People that are motivated by the social environment at work appreciate working in a friendly workplace where they can count on and turn to their colleagues. They see interacting with others around them as an important way to help maintain office harmony. Working in a company that promotes such an environment will allow them to feel enthusiastic and driven about their work.
2.	Social Utility - People that are motivated by social utility at work place high importance on being able to benefit others with their work. They feel driven when they can take part in tasks that they know will help others.
3.	Idea Sharing - People who are motivated by this value are driven by an environment where their ideas are appreciated and listened to. They feel motivated when they are encouraged to share their thoughts and when attention is paid to their suggestions.
4.	Influence - People who are motivated by influence like to be able to impact work outcomes through their involvement in the reaching of important conclusions. They feel driven when they can have a say in important decisions that will affect projects.
5.	Developing Others - Individuals that are motivated by developing others feel driven when they are able to pass on their skills and knowledge. They value the opportunity to transmit their capabilities and expertise to others.
 
Personal-development Motivators

The work value group 'Personal-development Motivators' relates to the values that contribute to an individual's professional self development and growth. Consisting of 'Surpassing', 'Competition', 'Intellectual Curiosity', 'Career Opportunities' and 'Appraisal', these values enable employees to advance in their job, and achieve success.

1.	Surpassing - People that are motivated by the value surpassing like to have opportunities to exceed themselves. They feel driven when their work provides them with opportunities that push them out of their comfort zone and test their limits.
2.	Competition - Individuals who feel driven by competition at work will feel stimulated by an environment that enables them to try to outperform others. They will be motivated by a workplace that encourages friendly contests between co- workers to reach targets or goals.
3.	Intellectual Curiosity - This factor refers to feeling motivated at work when acquiring new knowledge. People who are driven by this value like to work on tasks where they are able to discover new topics in order to broaden their horizons. They feel fuelled when they are able to satisfy their desire to learn.
4.	Career Opportunities - Individuals who are driven by career opportunities seek to climb up the career ladder, and appreciate chances for promotion. As a result, they will feel motivated when their job gives them the possibility to advance the status of their career.
5.	Appraisal - People that are motivated by appraisal like to have regular evaluations from their co-workers, or superiors, regarding the quality of their work. Being informed on how they are doing and about how others perceive their work will enable them to feel driven and on the right track in the projects that they undertake.

Contextual Motivators

The 'Contextual Motivators' work value group relates to the extrinsic motivations of an individual provided by the company, and encompasses 'Mobility', 'Remuneration', 'Well- being', 'Security' and 'Autonomous Working Conditions'. These can be defined as the values which enable a person to gain some form of external reward, and tend to be additional aspects to a person's work itself.

1.	Mobility - Individuals that are motivated by mobility like to have a job that allows them to move from place to place, rather than remaining at a desk for most of their schedule. Leaving the office on a regular basis will allow them to feel driven in the work they are undertaking.
2.	Remuneration - Those that are driven by remuneration feel motivated by jobs with factors such as high salary and other material rewards. Bonuses and additional benefits are important to them in order to feel enthusiastic about the work that they undertake.
3.	Well-being - This factor refers to those who feel motivated in their job when their
 
company places importance on their well-being. Factors such as a good balance between work and private life are crucial to them, and they will feel driven if their employer recognises the importance of occupational health.
4.	Security - Those that feel driven by security like to be assured that they have a long- term, permanent position that is not likely to change anytime soon, unless they wish it to. If their position is secured in such a way and they know that they are able to remain within the company for the long haul, they will feel driven and enthusiastic in their role."
5.	Autonomous Working Conditions - People who are motivated by autonomous working conditions value liberty in their working approach. They are motivated when their company offers flexibility, such as having independence in deciding how they proceed on their projects and tasks, and the ways in which they work.

1.1.	Main Areas of Application
MOTIVATION+ was specifically designed to help companies achieve a better understanding of what motivates people to succeed and in what type of position, job, and environment they will be the most productive. It may be used throughout an employee's career-span, or to optimise a company’s internal processes such as:

●	Recruitment - With MOTIVATION+, you can assess whether a candidate’s values match the culture of your organisation.
●	Career Management - You can find out whether an individual’s motivations allow them to succeed in the function and the position they strive for.
●	Internal Mobility - By assessing your employee’s motives and values, you will be able to implement changes that will lead your employees to reinforce their involvement and be more enthusiastic and engaged at work.
●	Prevention of Psychosocial Risks - With MOTIVATION+, you can identify sources of employee dissatisfaction and pinpoint areas for improvement. You will thus be better equipped to prepare courses of action to reduce employee stress as well as undesirable behaviours at work.

The questionnaire can also be used in conjunction with other occupational-based assessments to acquire a more comprehensive profile of individuals in specific roles. For example, combining MOTIVATION+ with EMOTION 2© provides in-depth insight into whether an individual is well-suited to obtain a leading position at work, by providing information on whether the individual’s values are a good fit for their job as well as their ability to motivate themselves to achieve goals and maintain a good relationship with their team.

1.2.	Questionnaire Structure
MOTIVATION+ consists of 41 questions and is divided into two parts. The first part assesses an individual’s motivational factors and comprises 40 questions that are
 
presented in a compositional or integrative format. Each question consists of three statements that require the test-taker to indicate the extent to which the statements are preferred to each other. In order to do so, the candidate selects two: the most motivating statement by clicking   and the least motivating statement by clicking . The third statement is considered as neutral. Each of the 15 factors in MOTIVATION+ is measured by 8 items. The questionnaire therefore measures 120 motivational components whilst appearing significantly shorter. This item structure also reduces the likelihood of respondent fatigue and response bias. Furthermore, forcing respondents to allocate their preferences to the three options of a question safeguards against impression management and the test-taker’s attempts to fake results.



Figure 1. Example of a Compositional Format Item on MOTIVATION+.

The second part of the questionnaire consists of 1 question with 15 sub-questions that concern the test-taker’s satisfaction with their current or previous job. A score of 1 indicates that the test-taker is not at all satisfied with this aspect in his / her job and a score of 10 indicates that the test-taker is very satisfied. Each of the 15 factors measured in MOTIVATION+ is represented by one global satisfaction question.

Figure 2. Example of Satisfaction Scale Items on MOTIVATION+.

Thus, MOTIVATION+’s questionnaire structure allows to compare an individual’s
 
motivation with their level of satisfaction. However, it is worthwhile to note that it is possible that an individual who may not be motivated by a certain factor can still be satisfied with the amount or role that this factor plays in their job.

1.3.	Mode of Administration, Languages and Special Requirements
MOTIVATION+ is administered online and works with all computer systems including Windows, MAC-OS and Linux. The assessment can be administered remotely and without supervision. A PDF version of the questionnaire is also available, if required. As reports are always generated online, if the test has been administered in paper format, then the scores must manually be entered onto the online platform to generate the candidate reports.

The questionnaire is currently available in English, French and Spanish. For more information on language availability, please contact Central Test’s Client or Consulting Service (customer@centraltest.com or consulting@centraltest.com).

MOTIVATION+ was designed to be easily used by individuals from diverse backgrounds and for those with a range of special needs. All test-takers are able to adjust visual screen specifications based on individual requirements. Similarly, respondents are able to access test instructions throughout the assessment. It is also possible to navigate through questions or change answers as desired. Alternatively, for blind candidates or those with severe visual disabilities, items may be read aloud by a trained administrator. Individuals with hearing impairments are not excluded from taking the questionnaire, since all content is presented visually.

Although the average time for completion is 15 minutes, MOTIVATION+ has no set time limit. Therefore, individuals with learning disabilities can take the time they need to complete the assessment. Administrators are thus encouraged to consider whether a test-taker who needed an unusual amount of time to take the assessment may have special needs. Administrators may contact Central Test for guidance on administering the questionnaire to individuals or groups with special requirements.

1.4.	Social Desirability
Social desirability is the tendency to present oneself in a manner that will be viewed as favourable by others. When done unintentionally, it is referred to as self-deception. When done intentionally, it is referred to as impression management (Tett & Simonet, 2011). As people are social by nature, they are generally inclined to seek some degree of social acceptance. Unlike aptitude tests, the results of questionnaires like MOTIVATION+ are affected by impression management. An individual’s attempt to present himself / herself in a favourable light thus negatively impacts test results, whether the questionnaire is completed online or in paper-based format (Dodou & de Winter, 2014).
MOTIVATION+ actively guards against social desirability with the use of an ipsative (forced
 
choice) questionnaire format. Research has found ipsative measures to be more resistant to distorted responding compared to more commonly used Likert-scales (Bowen, Martin, & Hunt, 2002; Kluger, Reilly, & Russell, 1991). Not only does the ipsative format reduce the test-taker’s ability to inflate their scores, but items are also combined in such a manner that makes it difficult for them to conceive a response strategy, as items are paired with equally appealing response options.

1.5.	Test-taker Requirements and Recommendations
MOTIVATION+ was designed for members of the general population, 18 years and older and is suitable for all occupational roles. It is recommended that test-takers receive notification of the objective of the assessment, conditions under which it will be administered, how data will be handled and stored, and the nature of any feedback well in advance. Potential candidates should also be asked to inform the test administrator beforehand of any special needs or requirements.

Previous test-taking experience is not required to take MOTIVATION+. Similarly, advanced education and work experience are not requirements to successfully take the assessment.

1.6.	Administrator Qualifications and Recommendations
The assessment was developed to be used by human resource (HR) professionals, training and executive development professionals, counsellors and psychologists. To administer MOTIVATION+, practitioners must complete standardised training and / or possess accredited testing standards qualifications. Training modules designed by Central Test ensure that administrators are able to administer the assessment under standardised conditions; score and norm results; interpret scores and generate written and verbal feedback for a range of organisational needs.

It is recommended that all administrators take MOTIVATION+, prior to administering the assessment, making sure to comply with all instructions. This will enable practitioners to become familiar with the assessment and therefore anticipate questions or challenges that may be identified by the test-takers.

Test administration must be in accordance with the organisation’s code of practice, as well as legal assessment guidelines on the use of psychometric assessments for employment purposes. All steps must be taken to ensure test administration is objective and fair. Therefore, it is particularly recommended that administrators are aware of international and country laws governing; a) Data Protection, b) Gender Discrimination, c) Age Discrimination, d) Race and Ethnicity Relations, e) Disabilities Discrimination, and f) Religious Discrimination prior to administration.
 
Additionally, prior to use, administrators must be familiar with Central Test's conditions of use and code of ethics and adhere to its quality charter. Administrators must:

•	Ensure that the appropriate test has been chosen to meet the specified organisational need
•	Make sure that the test-taker is informed about the assessment and its purpose prior to administration.
•	Obtain test-taker’s consent prior to administration
•	Use appropriate norms to interpret results
•	Provide the test-taker with feedback on results
•	Delete questionnaire results and personal candidate data upon demand
•	Treat results and candidate data confidentially and obtain candidate consent before transferring personal data or results to third parties.
•	Ensure that only qualified personnel administer assessments and have access to data
•	Ensure that test materials and reports are stored in secure environments

For more detailed information about Central Test's code of ethics, refer to Central Test's quality charter.

1.6.1.	Testing Conditions

For best results and candidate experience, MOTIVATION+ should be administered in a quiet, well-lit and ventilated environment. The test-taker must be informed about the assessment in advance and should have sufficient time to take it. In order to reduce their anxiety, the assessment should be referred to as a questionnaire and not as a test.

For an online administration, it is important that test-takers have comfortable seating, adequate desk space, adequate computer screen size, a keyboard and a mouse. Prior to testing, administrators should ensure that all relevant candidate background information has been collected and verified in order to confirm that the candidate taking the assessment is the right individual.

In cases where individuals take the assessment in the privacy of their home or a convenient location, it is recommended that they do so using a computer they are familiar and comfortable with. For security purposes, all background information and candidate details must be provided to the administrator prior to a candidate taking the assessment. The background information is pre-filled by the test administrator but can be corrected by the candidate after the completion of the assessment, when verifying the ‘Additional Information’ page post questionnaire completion. Candidates receive notifications to take the questionnaire via email with an embedded web link and login details. Web links to the questionnaire are password-protected and unique to a candidate’s account. It is possible to set expiration dates in order to ensure candidates complete the questionnaire within a specified time-frame. For additional security, administrators can also configure the invitation to ensure that the assessment must be completed from the same IP address
 
once the questionnaire has been accessed.

For monitoring purposes, completion times are recorded to ensure a pleasant test-taking experience. It also allows administrators to see if a candidate rushed through the questionnaire or needed an unusual amount of time to complete the assessment. Test- takers are encouraged to answer questions quickly in order to avoid spending too much time thinking about each statement. It is also recommended that they answer spontaneously as there are no right or wrong answers.

1.6.2.	Answering Questions

Although instructions for completing MOTIVATION+ are presented on-screen, it is important that administrators establish and maintain rapport with candidates. In the case where MOTIVATION+ is administered offline, instructions should be read aloud by the administrator with candidates given an opportunity to ask questions before taking the assessment. Administrators should also verify that candidates understand what they are required to do prior to starting the assessment session.

Guidelines for a few scenarios:

•	If a test-taker does not understand a question, the administrator should answer carefully and avoid explaining the meaning of words or items in his / her own words in order to not lead them toward specific responses.
•	If an administrator suspects that a test-taker’s lack of understanding is due to language proficiency, the administrator should ask them to take the assessment
in the language they are most comfortable with.
•	If an administrator suspects that a test-taker’s lack of understanding is due to overcautious responding, they should be encouraged to endorse their most likely response.

1.7.	Technical and Security Issues
This chapter details guidelines governing the security of administering MOTIVATION+. These guidelines ensure that every administration of MOTIVATION+ is a pleasant, objective and fair process. Security specifications ensure that candidate information is protected both during administration and after assessment completion.

1.7.1.	Respecting the Ethical Charter

As a publisher of online assessment tools, Central Test respects the legal conventions of French labour law and the regulatory provisions resulting from the law of 6 January 1978 pertaining to information technology, files and freedoms: Declaration N°1834067. Additionally, as of 25th May, 2018, Central Test complies with the GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) made by the European Parliament & Council.
 
Test results are not to be forwarded to a third person without the explicit consent of the test candidate. As the test-taker has a right to access his / her results, the administrator must grant the test-taker access automatically or when he / she requests it.

The test-taker also has the right to request that all of his / her personal data be permanently deleted. To do this, they must contact either the organisation directly, who will delete his / her data, or Central Test.
1.7.2.	Confidentiality and Security of User Data

Central Test guarantees the security and confidentiality of data generated during the administration of online tests. Access codes are encrypted in the database and cannot be accessed by anyone. Passwords are computationally generated and are not visible to companies. A URL rewriting module (secure link generator) is installed and has transparent parameter passing for the user.

Browsing and data exchange via the Central Test application can be secured and encrypted using SSL. Secure browsing is guaranteed by the https protocol, which is represented by an icon in the form of a padlock in the internet browser. The Central Test application has a “GeoTrust SSL True BusinessID” digital signature, issued and certified by GeoTrust©. This certificate is irrefutable evidence of our serious attitude towards security and protects all of Central Test’s assessments from phishing attacks. Invitations to take tests are made via secured links that are of limited use (in terms of numbers and duration). The tests are timed and IP addresses are tracked. Access to questionnaires may also be limited in terms of numbers and duration.

1.7.3.	Hardware Architecture and Server Availability

Central Test’s architecture consists of a network of 10 physical dedicated servers providing high-quality service.

Each server is housed in a specialised data centre featuring:

•	dedicated lines
•	a guaranteed bandwidth of 100Mbps (for each server)
•	redundant energy sources
•	4-hour Equipment Restoration Time
•	2-hour Incident Intervention Time
•	monitoring and assistance 24/7/365

Access to server administration is restricted by the IP address and is password-secured. Data exchanges are also secure.
 
The Central Test application has been tested using the following browsers:

•	Internet Explorer 8 or above
•	Firefox 21 or above
•	Google Chrome 30 or above
•	Safari 7 or above

1.7.4.	Computer-generated Reports

Reports can be generated within minutes of candidates completing the questionnaire. The MOTIVATION+ report is user friendly, customisable and available in several languages. Report content can be tailored depending on the needs of the administrator. Separate reports may also be configured for the candidate and the company, recruiter, coach or psychologist. Reports can also be generated in PDF format.

1.8.	Supply, Conditions and Availability
Conditions of supply and availability for MOTIVATION+ vary from country to country. However, the following points generally apply:
•	MOTIVATION+ is only available for psychologists, HR practitioners and coaches.
•	Training is compulsory prior to use and distribution.
•	This manual is available to individuals who have been trained to use MOTIVATION+.
•	MOTIVATION+ can be ordered online, or by contacting any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide (customer@centraltest.com).
•	For information on MOTIVATION+’s prices and related products and services, contact any Central Test customer service representative or local partner worldwide.
•	For more information on the training, kindly contact Central Test's customer service or one of Central Test's partners.
 
2.	Conceptual and Practical Scale Development
MOTIVATION+ was developed using robust theoretical concepts, text analysis of practical and relevant work requirements and advanced scientific analyses. All items in the item bank were piloted and pretested with professionals from multiple continents in order to ensure that the work behaviours assessed were contemporary, global and culture-free.

2.1.	Theoretical Background
For over a century, the working world has faced major transformations (Broeck, Vansteenkiste, Witte, Soenens, & Lens, 2010). Closely related to the changing economic market, these changes have been moderated by globalisation, and facilitated by new information and communication technologies (ICT). Technological, economic and social advances have brought forward new challenges to the workplace which highlight the importance of the role of the human being in the work environment, and expose the need to question how performance should be defined in technical and human terms. The post- war period was a turning point for human capital management in modern companies. Production methods were improved to achieve a maximum level of efficiency. From this, work psychology emerged, providing insights on key issues such as decision-making, recruitment, performance evaluation, management of organisations and welfare at work, etc. (Lévy-Leboyer, 2006).

Since the beginning of the twentieth century, economists have tried to answer one specific question: “how are employees motivated?” The first answer to this question established the belief that employees are generally lazy and motivated by monetary incentives. This notion was institutionalised by Frederick Winslow Taylor via his Scientific Management theory, and is now well known as the principle of the “economic man”. However, psychologists quickly realised that the concept of motivation is centred on factors that are much more complex than simple financial rewards, and several experiments have shown that money is not the primary interest of employees.

Over the last few decades, scientists have attended to this matter (G. P. Latham & Budworth, 2006) and proposed various models of motivation. And after seventy years of scientific research, the modern perception of motivation appears to be explained through a complex and multifactorial process. Central to this process are individual characteristics (affect, cognition and social), environmental aspects, and the interaction of these two elements (Lévy-Leboyer, 2006). Motivation is therefore defined as a “physiological and psychological process, responsible for the initiation, maintenance and termination of behaviour and the appetitive or aversive value of the situation in which the specific behaviour occurs” (Bloch et al., 1991). Vallerand and Thill (1993) defined motivation as “the hypothetical construct that describes the internal and/or external forces that produce the initiation, direction, intensity and persistence of behaviour”. Put simply, this definition states that motivation is a hypothetical, and therefore abstract, construct of mental processes which can only be measured indirectly by observing people’s behaviour or behavioural intentions.
 
The theories of Maslow and Herzberg appear to be the cornerstones of the many theories of motivation proposed during the twentieth century. Despite many limitations to their hypotheses, their approach was hugely popular within human resources, and their names are still present to this day. They claimed that motivation is a process that occurs when a humans act in a specific way to meet their demands. Their great contribution was to then incorporate into their theory, originally considered solely as an exchange system of effort and financial reward, a spiritual dimension (Lévy-Leboyer, 2006). The stage of the “economic man” was then followed by the stage of the “social man,” or in other words the “human relations movement,” which has its roots in the work of Elton Mayo and the discovery of the Hawthorne effect. Mayo discovered that the performance of workers can be improved simply by observing them, through their awareness of this observation. (Mayo, 1949). This work helped to initiate a wide range of research in the social psychology field. Thus, motivation became a multi-dimensional concept, addressed through human needs, personality traits, context, human-environment suitability, cognition affects and emotions (Latham & Pinder, 2005).

Nowadays, because of the evolution of research on motivation, Lévy-Leboyer (2006) emphasises that: "the language itself has changed: we no longer talk of "needs" but rather values and patterns." (P. 35). The central challenge for organizations is to know and understand the priorities set by stakeholders, in order to construct a company policy based on the hierarchy of values (Lévy-Leboyer, 2006). But what exactly are values? According to Bilsky & Schwartz (1994), values are commonly composed of five basic characteristics: they are concepts or beliefs, refer to desired behaviours or conditions, are not confined to a particular situation, serve as a guideline in the selection or evaluation of behaviour and events, and are classified according to the relative importance that we give them. Similarly, these characteristics may apply to a particular context, for example, “work values” is an expression for general values in a work context (Ros, Schwartz & Surkiss, 1999). It is necessary to differentiate values from attitudes; an attitude is limited to a factor such as a person, location or event, while values, in contrast, are more general and more entrenched. It is thought that values are developed through social interactions, and may be passed culturally through generations. Theories also suggest that in early developmental stages, individuals begin with a wide pool of values, but over time these become refined and individuals learn to direct their behaviour based on the values they prioritise the most. Now that the concept of values has been explored, it is necessary to establish the link between work values and motivation.

Note that in the literature the terms "needs", "motives" and "values" are often used as synonyms, but ‘values’ can be considered an approach to motivation in themselves, specifically as secondary engines that drive actions determined by needs, socialisation, cognition and experience (Deci & Ryan, 2000; Kooij, De Lange, Jansen, Kanfer & Dikkers, 2011; Krumm, Grube & Hertel, 2013). Values are therefore rooted in needs, with the main difference being that needs are innate, while values are acquired through cognition and experience. They are indirectly included in most theories (Latham & Pinder, 2005), and can be divided into two areas; principles (involving an idea of how behaviour should be) and preferences (expressing cravings and/or a hierarchy of values) (Parks & Guay, 2009). Schwartz (2006) argues that values have played a central role in various social science
 
disciplines, including psychology. They can be used to characterise individuals or companies, measure changes across a time axis, and explain behaviours and attitudes.

In addition, personal goals serve as a mediator between values and behaviour, in the sense that values influence the formation of goals, which then lead to certain behavioural choices (Kanfer, 1990). However, Parks & Guay (2009) raise a fundamental issue concerning the measurement of this concept; studies have not been able to empirically identify the link between motivation and values. However, many studies show that values are involved in decision-making processes, the pursuit of goals and are above all influential on the behaviour of individuals.

Based on these explanations, we can still assume that values adequately meet the definition of motivation, as (a) they are primarily a hypothetical construct, (b) they describe the internal or external forces behind action, and (c) they allow a global definition of the initiation, direction, intensity and persistence of behaviour. For example: "status" is a hypothetical construct (i.e. an abstract notion) that comes from an external force (i.e. social recognition) and that will determine the behaviour of the individual who attaches great importance to this value.

Further proof for these assumptions has been found during questionnaire validation studies. Research suggests that performance at work has a higher correlation with motivation that stems from values rather than motivation that stems directly from the task itself (Gagné et al, 2015; Gagne and Deci, 2005).

The theory of basic human values proposed by Schwartz (1992, 1994) contains 10 universal values which differ in terms of motivation. These may be opposite or complementary and can be organised into four higher-order groups. Schwartz (2006) describes six key features that all values have in common:
•	"Values are beliefs"
•	"Values refer to desirable goals"
•	"Values guide the selection of actions, people or events"
•	"Values are used as standard or criteria"
•	"Values are ordered by importance"
•	"The relative importance of multiple values guides action"

The distinction between them is therefore based on the different types of induced motivation. However, this universal model is not specifically designed for the working environment.

The work of Ros et al. (1999) was the first empirical attempt to understand the link between values and attitudes, or behaviour, and to apply the basic human values to the workplace. His pioneering research has many advantages, including the multicultural character of the theory and the importance of distinguishing several general values.
 
Since the publication of this study by Ros et al., over a decade of research has focused on values at work. In 2013, the "Munster Work Value Measure (MWVM)" emerged (Krumm et al., 2013), based on the inventory of values by Schwartz (1992, 1994), which brings together 56 motivational values, represented in a circumplex model and ordered by four meta-values. The MWVN is similar to the basic human values of Schwartz, introducing 21 values ordered by five meta-values. They are also represented in a circumplex and are titled "Intrinsic Growth Values"; “Affective Values”; "Generativity Values"; "Context-related Values"; and "Extrinsic Growth Values". The Intrinsic Growth Values encompass values that achieve personal fulfillment through work itself, such as "learning", "autonomy" and "achievements". Affective Values refer to emotions and feelings that can be experienced at work, for example, values like "enjoyment" or “appreciation". Context-related Values refer to elements around work with values such as "security" or "health". Extrinsic Growth Values refer to the acquisition of resources related to success at work and are composed of values such as "money", "status" or "influence". Finally, Generativity Values refer to all social values that have a concept of transmission and mutual assistance, such as "generativity", "helping" or "legacy". Many studies have shown in the past that a distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is relevant, and the four-factor model of Schwartz has been replicated many times. The MWVM is an extension of this structure, adding the concept of generativity, defined as a measure of sensitivity by age. (Krumm et al., 2013; Ros et al., 1999; Schwartz, 1992, 1994).

The model of MOTIVATION+ utilises Schwartz’s four-dimensional work value structure - measuring the four work values Self-Advancement, Internal, External and Social - as a theoretical framework to categorise the 15 factors measured in MOTIVATION+ into three motivational value groups - Social Motivators, Personal-development Motivators and Contextual Motivators. This categorisation into the three groups facilitates ease in understanding the 15 motivational factors that encompass MOTIVATION+. Figure 3 shows the model of MOTIVATION+ with its 3 motivational value groups and 15 factors.
 
 

Figure 3. Model of MOTIVATION+.

Below is a table showing the mapping of MOTIVATION+’s factors with the work values measured in the MWVM.

Table 1. Comparison Between the Factors of MOTIVATION+ and the MWVM.

MOTIVATION+ Factors	MWVM Work Values
Autonomous Working Conditions	Autonomy
Competition	Influence
Career Opportunities	Advancement
Intellectual Curiosity	Learning
Surpassing	Learning, Generativity
Idea-Sharing	Helping
Well-Being	Health
Influence	Autonomy
Remuneration	Money
 

Mobility	Legacy
Security	Security
Social Environment	Social Contact
Social Utility	Helping
Developing Others	Generativity
Appraisal	Appreciation

Age

Values are particularly interesting when measuring motivation because they are relatively stable over time. They may change under special circumstances, for reasons such as the desire to maintain a good image of oneself, the entry into the world of work or a workplace change. Furthermore, there are certain changes in the evolution of values throughout the lifespan of a person. For example, the older one gets, the greater importance given to targets with an emotional component rather than future-oriented goals. This reversal can be explained by a change in the temporal perception of individuals.

Literature states that there are several tools which indirectly measure the differences between individuals based on age. These differences may be relevant for certain companies, and especially career management services (Krumm et al., 2013). For example, generativity values should be of greater importance for people who have advanced in their careers (values such as legacy and social utility), while on the contrary, those at the start of their career will emphasise extrinsic-growth values (such as status and career development opportunities) (Schwartz, 2006).

Gender

Besides age, there are also gender differences in the motivation theories discussed in the literature. Indeed, Schwartz and Rubel (2005) pointed out that many studies deal with a difference between men and women regarding the importance attached to certain values. The research suggests that these differences do exist, even if they are small. For example, men are more likely to have values that refer to action (such as influence or power), whereas women are oriented more towards social values (such as benevolence and universalism) (Schwartz, 2006). A small number of studies have shown that there is even a difference between men and women concerning work values. Specifically, it was shown that women consider social values as more important (e.g. helping others) while men give more importance to extrinsic values (e.g. advancement) (Schwartz & Rubel, 2005).
 
2.2.	Development of MOTIVATION+
MOTIVATION+ was developed via a thorough, multistage process in a comprehensive and scientific manner. The development of the test started in 2016, as a result of accrued demand from companies using psychometric assessments in order to provide a “supplementary aid” in HR processes. Extensive empirical and theoretical research was conducted to create the groups, factors and items of MOTIVATION+. The questionnaire was also pretested several times to ensure that it met the criteria for reliability and validity that is established by internationally recognised psychological institutions. Special attention was also given to guard against social desirability as well as to simplify the ergonomics of the assessment.

2.2.1.	Groups, Factors and Item Construction

MOTIVATION+ is a complete and comprehensive revision of Central Test’s motivational assessment, PRISM ©, which exists only in French. MOTIVATION+ is a result of a review of PRISM’s theoretical background, question format, and item bank, to match contemporary literature on the subject of work motivation. MOTIVATION+ measures 15 motivational factors (detailed in chapter 1). These factors are grouped into three work value dimensions; Social Motivators, Personal-development Motivators and Contextual Motivators.

Multiple reviews were conducted to ensure that the factors are clearly defined, and that items targeting each factor accurately reflect modern and business-relevant behaviours, thus resulting in the following:

1.	Greater differentiation between each motivation-based factor
2.	Inclusion of factors that target occupational and organisational fit
3.	Clearer item structure and wording
4.	Updated use of terms and relevance of items to match the current working world
5.	Simple and easily comprehensible use of language

Thus, items for MOTIVATION+ were written to promote ease of response as well as facilitate candidates’ mental connection and understanding of it. As the questionnaire aimed to capture work behaviours in multiple contexts, items were checked for cultural bias, clarity, offensiveness and language accuracy.

2.2.2.	Ipsative Response Format

Response items for the 40 core questions of MOTIVATION+ are written in an ipsative (forced-choice) format. This means that respondents choose between descriptors according to their preference (in this case, choosing a descriptor which captures their preference most, and which captures their preference least).

Ipsative formats have been found to reduce response bias (Chan, 2003; Saville & Willson,
 
1991; Ten Holt, van Duijn & Boomsma, 2010). The fact that respondents cannot endorse all items eliminates acquiescence (the tendency to agree with all items on a questionnaire), reduces susceptibility to impression management and means that it is generally more difficult to fake (Brown & Maydeu-Olivares, 2011a). Ipsative formats make it impossible to provide the same response on all items, thereby resulting in greater differentiation of scores within a profile.

2.2.3.	Satisfaction Scale’s Likert Format

Question 41 requires the candidate to indicate their level of satisfaction of work, on each of the 15 factors measured in MOTIVATION+. This is presented as fifteen likert scale questions, one for each factor, ranging from scores of 1 to 10. A score of 1 means not at all satisfied,’ a score of 5 means ‘neither satisfied nor dissatisfied,’ and a score of 10 means ‘very satisfied.’

2.2.4.	Pre-tests and Pilot Study

MOTIVATION+ was constructed in a manner that ensured items were culturally equivalent from the early stages of development, rather than focusing on the cultural adaption after the questionnaire validity had been established within a single context – the typical practice of test developers.

Pre-tests were conducted with a range of male and female professionals across the globe to ensure that items were accurate, relevant, clear, concise, culture-free, bias-free and that they reflected targeted work behaviours. After four pretests and a pilot, the final questionnaire was validated with a sample of 915 English-speaking professionals from various countries. The sample consisted of English speakers from different continents in order to establish the questionnaire as an international measure of motivation at work.
 
3.	Scoring
A raw score is the total number of responses endorsed by a candidate for each factor measured. In the context of an occupational motivation assessment, raw scores mean little as they do not provide effective or appropriate comparisons between candidates across a specific motivator. Norms enable Human Resource practitioners, managers and recruiters to evaluate an individual’s score relative to the score of other delegates who have completed the same assessment.

3.1.	The Relationship between Raw Scores and Norms
The best norm group is one that is most representative of the characteristics of the individuals taking a test. Applied assessment assumes personality traits, interests, motivations, values, attitudes and perceptions are distributed along a normal probability or bell-shaped curve. Therefore, norm groups effectively identify individual scores across this distribution. In any given population, levels of a target attribute may be found. Therefore, for a given attribute or trait, the normal curve represents the norm or average performance of a population and the scores that are above and below the average for that population (Kaplan & Saccuzzo, 2008). For norms to be meaningful, the sample used must reflect the intended population of test-takers. If a test is developed for engineers, the norm sample must consist of engineers in the population. Similarly, if an assessment was developed for nurses, it is not appropriate for use in the selection of chemists. Norm groups can range in size from a few hundred to a hundred thousand. However, the larger the norm group sample size, the closer the approximation to a normal population distribution. Figure 4 shows the normal bell curve.



Figure 4. Normal Bell-shaped Curve Showing the Distribution of Percentages, Standard Deviations and Standard Ten (Sten).
 
Key to the creation of norms is the conversion of raw scores into derived scores. This process provides a system of common metrics that readily facilitates the interpretation of test scores. For MOTIVATION+, the forms of score standardization used were: 1) Mean; 2) Median; 3) Standard deviation; 4) Standard score; 5) Standard ten (sten); and 6) Standard error of measurement. Table 2 describes the various types of derived scores used in the validation of MOTIVATION+.

Table 2. Types of Derived Scores used to Standardise MOTIVATION+.


Sr.
No.	
Derived Score	
Symbol	
Definition and Characteristics




1	



Mean	


µ	
Mean is the average score of all participants who complete an assessment. The mean is calculated by dividing the sum of all scores by the number of participants. The formula for calculating the Mean is:

μ = ( Σ X ) / N,
where ΣX is the sum of all the population observations, and N is the number of population observations.





2	




Median	





x͂	
Median is the score that separates the highest scores from the lowest scores in equal numbers.

The observed values are first ranked in ascending order. The median is then the value that divides the study population into two subsets of equal size (if the number of observations n is even, the median is the half-sum of the rank terms n and n + 1).

Like Mean, Median is a measure of the general tendency of a group of scores.





3	




Standard Deviation	




σ	
Standard Deviation is a measure of the amount of variation across scores for candidates who take an assessment. A small standard deviation indicates scores are close to the mean, while a large value tells us there is much variability across individuals. The formula for calculating Standard Deviation is:

σ = sqrt [ Σ ( Xi - μ ) 2 / N ],
where μ is the population mean, Xi is the ith element from the population, and N is the number of elements in the
population.
 






4	




Standard Score	




Z	Standard Score is an estimate of whether an individual’s score is above average, average or below average compared to peers. Scored on a scale from -4 to 4 with zero in the middle representing average.
Positive scores are above average while negative scores are below average. Z scores are calculated using the formula:

z = (x - μx) / σx,
where x is a normal random variable, μ is the mean of x, and σ is the standard deviation of x.







5	






Standard Ten	






Sten	
For a Standard Score with scores ranging from 1 – 10, here Mean is 5.5 and Standard Deviation equals 2. The formula for calculating Sten Score is:

Sten = ( X− µ/σ ) 2+5.5,
where X is the candidate’s raw score, µ is the mean of raw scores for all candidates, σ is the standard deviation of raw scores on the standardisation sample, multiplied by 2 + 5.5.

Sten Scores are rounded to the nearest whole number with values less than 1 or greater than 10 rounded up or down respectively.




6	


Standard Error of Measurement	



SEM	
SEM is related to test reliability and provides an indication of the dispersion of measurement errors associated with test scores from a group of candidates. It helps us to identify the level of errors when estimating a candidate's true scores from their observed scores. The smaller the SEM, the more accurate are the assessments that are being made. The formula for calculating SEM is:

SEM = 𝜎 S √(1 - reliability)


3.2.	Transforming Raw Scores into Standardised Scores
The 40 questions that measure an individual's motivational values are transformed from raw scores to standardised scores as each value is measured by 8 items. For the 120 components/items measuring motivation, the minimum and maximum overall score for
 
each attribute is 0 and 10. For the satisfaction score, the report reflects the score that was chosen by the participant on the scale from 0 to 10 for each of the 15 areas.

The conversion of raw scores to standardised scores is achieved using a four-step process, as below.

Step 1 Ipsative scores are calculated for each scale by summing all forced-choice responses for each attribute. For each item, 1 is assigned to the endorsed response which is the most preferred, 0 for the response that is not endorsed & -1 to the endorsed response which is the least preferred.

Step 2 Scores are repositioned on a scale from 0 to 10 by using the following formula:

Whereby max refers to the maximum possible score of each scale and min refers to the minimum possible score of each scale.

Step 3 To enable the comparisons between individuals, scores for each scale are standardised using the mean and standard deviation across respondents. This process produces a z score using the formula:

z = (score – (μ/)

Step 4 Standardised scores are then transformed into sten scores from 1 to 10 using the formula:

sten = z * 2 + 5.5

3.3.	Standard Error of Measurement
As no test score is perfect, an estimation of the possible amount of error present within a score is required. This amount of error associated with a score is known as the standard error of measurement (SEM). SEM helps to understand what is a candidate’s true score and the extent to which it differs from the obtained score (Harvill, 1991). In an ideal world, SEM would be calculated by having an individual take an assessment on many occasions over a long period of time. The extent to which there is variation across each score obtained by the candidate would be classified as the standard error of measurement. However, as it is not feasible to assess candidates multiple times, SEM must be calculated using a different approach via the formula as stated below.


 
where,
rxx is the reliability of the test, or the reliability of a factor measured in the test S is the standard deviation

For the factor Idea Sharing in MOTIVATION+, SEM = 1.84 * (sqrt.1- 0.78) i.e. 0.86.

SEM is usually accompanied by a confidence interval (CI), or a range around the estimated “true” score. From this confidence band, we are able to determine the extent to which a score may vary. However, it is important to note that SEM is related to reliability. Therefore, as reliability increases, SEM decreases. Below are some common SEM confidence intervals and their formulas:

68% CI = Score ± SEM
95% CI = Score ± (1.96 * SEM)
99% CI = Score ± (2.58 * SEM)

Thus, at a 95% confidence interval, the factor Idea Sharing with an obtained score of 6 and SEM of 1.59, has a confidence band of 4.31 to 7.69. This means we can be 95% confident that an individual’s true score lies in this range.

3.4.	Choosing an Appropriate Norm Group
Norms make it possible to give meaning to an individual’s score. The interpretation of the same score may therefore differ depending on individual differences, such as study level. For accurate interpretation, it is necessary to compare an individual’s score with a group that is most similar to him/her. To choose the appropriate norm, first identify the country of the candidate. Then from that country, identify the age, gender, level of education, number of years’ work experience, socio-professional status, industry or occupational group that is most appropriate for the candidate. Alternatively, it is possible to create your own internal norms, based on the candidates that have already been assessed.

3.5.	Creating In-house Norms
It is possible to generate internal organisational norms if there is a relevant sample of 100 or more individuals. In-house norms ensure that comparisons between individuals and the reference group reflect the target role, tasks and work environment as closely as possible. In-house norms are particularly valuable in situations where standard norms are not available, roles are new, the organisation has a unique client base or business function, and in cases where the applicant pool for a role is significantly higher or lower than expected.

To create in-house norms, first calculate the mean and standard deviation for each factor on MOTIVATION+ and score the results based on the step-by-step guide outlined in Chapter 3.2. Organisations will then be able to compare individual applicants or employees to a local normal group.
 
3.6.	Link between Scores and Report Content
Personalised Motivation Comments

Comments on the MOTIVATION+ report reflect the scoring process. An individual receives a score of 0 to 10 (as demonstrated in Chapter 3.2.). The comments provide an extensive interpretation of all the factors that are within the three work value groups of the test. They are chosen from six levels according to the score of the candidate, and detail the individual’s motivations according to his/her score. Higher scores are accompanied by stronger descriptors, weaker scores are accompanied by weaker descriptors, and so on. For example, a candidate with a low score on a factor may be described as ‘not appearing to be motivated’ by the relevant factor. A high score on the other hand may describe an individual as being ‘highly motivated’ by the relevant factor. It is important to note that scores should be interpreted in relative terms as the order of the targeted factors is more important than their absolute score.

Personalised Satisfaction and Advice Comments

For each MOTIVATION+ factor, the report also provides an interpretation of the candidate’s current satisfaction level with each factor in their current or most recent role, based on their responses to the satisfaction questions within the questionnaire. The satisfaction comments are chosen from three levels according to the candidate’s score (between 0 to 10). The level of strength and detail within the satisfaction comments corresponds to the combined motivation and satisfaction scores for each factor. In instances where motivation factor scores are high but satisfaction scores are low, additional advice comments indicate actions the candidate could take in order to improve their level of satisfaction. No advice comment will be shown when satisfaction scores are low and motivation factor scores are also low, as the candidate’s responses indicate that this is not a significant motivator for them, so increasing their level of satisfaction in these areas is not relevant.
 
4.	Sample Descriptives
The final sample used to validate MOTIVATION+ consisted of 864 participants (465 females and 399 males), from a large range of occupational groups. Data was collected from the internet crowdsourcing marketplace, Amazon Mechanical Turk, the Research and Innovation Testing Centre of Central Test, as well as HR / Client data in order to ensure that the reported data is objective, non-discriminatory and relevant to the intended population.

Tables 3 to 6 provide an overview of the sample descriptives.


Table 3. Descriptives Based on Gender.


Gender	
N	
Percentage (%)

Females	
465	
53.82

Males	
399	
46.18

Table 4. Descriptives Based on Age Group.


Age Group	
N	
Percentage (%)

18 - 25	
158	
18.29

26 - 33	
262	
30.32

34 - 41	
211	
24.42

42 - 49	
102	
11.81

50-56	
76	
8.80

57 and above	
55	
6.37
 
Table 5. Descriptives Based on Study Level.


Study Level	
N	
Percentage (%)
Level 1: Master's Degree, PhD, Engineering or Business School, MBA	
208	
24.07
Level 2: Bachelor's Degree, First- year Masters	384	44.44
Level 3: 2 years of Vocational or University Studies	
141	
16.32
Level 4: High School Diploma	93	10.76
Level 5: Trades Training, No High School Diploma	
15	
1.74
Student	12	1.39

Not Defined	
11	
1.27

Table 6. Descriptives Based on Country of Origin.


Country of Origin	
N	
Percentage (%)
USA	493	57.06
India	205	23.73
Other	166	19.21

Note: Countries of Origin in the "Other" category have been grouped together as so as they correspond to a number that is not sufficient to be represented. The countries grouped as so are: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Lebanon, Macedonia, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Netherlands, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom and Zimbabwe.
 
5.	Norms
Norms provide information that allow comparisons to be made between individual candidate scores and the scores of a particular reference group.

Norms are standardised scores. Scores on psychological tests like MOTIVATION+ are most commonly interpreted by reference to the norm group scores.

There are two purposes of norms:

1.	Norms indicate an individual’s relative standing in the normative sample to allow the evaluation of his/her performance in relation to others.
2.	Norms provide compared measures that enable a direct comparison of an individual’s performance on a difference test (Anastasi, 1982).

Tables 7 to 11 detail the mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, maximum, range and standard estimate scores for the English-speaking sample on factors of MOTIVATION+. These tables are based on gender, age group, study level and country of origin.

Table 7. Motivation Score Norms for the Whole Sample.


Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Idea Sharing	
5.06	
1.88	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.06
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.54	
1.84	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.06
Surpassing	4.42	1.95	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.07

Remuneration	
5.62	
2.58	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09

Influence	
5.32	
2.13	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.07

Feedback	
3.91	
2.02	
3.80	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.07

Competition	
2.86	
2.16	
2.50	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.07
 
Career Opportunities	6.59	2.01	6.90	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.07
Mobility	3.38	219	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.07
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.13	
2.2	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.07
Well-being	4.53	2.07	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.07

Security	
5.81	
2.43	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.08
Developing Others	
4.54	
1.91	
4.40	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.06
Social Utility	5.70	2.25	5.60	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.08
Social Environment	
5.77	
1.92	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.07


Table 8. Motivation Score Norms Based on Gender.


Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Females							

Idea Sharing	
5.04	
1.87	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.45	
1.84	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.09
Surpassing	4.34	1.96	4.40	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.09

Remuneration	
5.74	
2.62	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.12

Influence	
5.20	
2.14	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10
 
Feedback	3.90	2.08	3.80	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.10

Competition	
2.65	
2.25	
2.50	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.10
Career Opportunities	
6.72	
1.98	
6.90	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.09
Mobility	3.36	2.23	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.19	
2.19	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10
Well-being	4.42	2.13	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10

Security	
5.95	
2.38	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.11
Developing Others	
4.45	
1.86	
4.40	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.09
Social Utility	5.91	2.29	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.11
Social Environment	
5.87	
1.95	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.09
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Males							

Idea Sharing	
5.08	
1.91	
5.00	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.10
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.66	
1.83	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.09
Surpassing	4.52	1.92	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10
 
Remuneration	5.49	2.53	5.60	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.13

Influence	
5.45	
2.13	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.11

Feedback	
3.93	
1.95	
3.80	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10

Competition	
3.10	
2.03	
3.10	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.10
Career Opportunities	
6.44	
2.05	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10
Mobility	3.39	2.15	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.11
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.06	
2.21	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.11
Well-being	4.65	1.98	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10

Security	
5.64	
2.48	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.12
Developing Others	
4.65	
1.97	
4.40	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10
Social Utility	5.47	2.19	5.60	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.11

Social Environment	
5.66	
1.89	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09


Table 9. Motivation Score Norms Based on Age Groups.


Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

18 - 25							

Idea Sharing	
5.17	
1.89	
5.00	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.15
 

Intellectual Curiosity	5.39	1.79	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.14
Surpassing	4.95	1.92	5.00	0.60	9.40	8.80	0.15

Remuneration	
5.06	
2.32	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.18

Influence	
4.97	
1.90	
5.00	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.15

Feedback	
4.34	
1.96	
4.40	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.16

Competition	
3.71	
2.10	
3.80	
0.00	
8.10	
8.10	
0.17
Career Opportunities	
6.28	
1.93	
6.30	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.15
Mobility	3.85	1.98	3.80	0.00	8.80	8.80	0.16
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.46	
2.15	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.17
Well-being	4.97	1.80	5.00	1.30	10.00	8.70	0.14

Security	
5.05	
1.98	
5.00	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.16
Developing Others	
4.88	
1.95	
5.00	
0.60	
9.40	
8.80	
0.15
Social Utility	5.43	2.05	5.00	1.30	10.00	8.70	0.16
Social Environment	
5.66	
1.68	
5.60	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.13
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

26 - 33							
 
Idea Sharing	4.90	1.86	5.00	0.60	9.40	8.80	0.12
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.72	
1.77	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.11
Surpassing	4.50	1.76	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.11

Remuneration	
5.76	
2.29	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.14

Influence	
5.18	
2.07	
5.00	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.13

Feedback	
4.14	
1.95	
3.80	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.12

Competition	
3.24	
2.02	
3.10	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.13
Career Opportunities	
6.57	
1.87	
6.90	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.12
Mobility	3.55	2.05	3.80	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.13
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.72	
2.03	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.13
Well-being	4.76	1.88	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.12

Security	
5.67	
2.27	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.14
Developing Others	
4.43	
1.87	
4.40	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.12
Social Utility	5.58	2.08	5.60	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.13
Social Environment	
5.48	
1.92	
5.60	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.12
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE
 

34 - 41							

Idea Sharing	
4.94	
1.87	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.13
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.33	
1.76	
5.00	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.12
Surpassing	4.00	2.01	3.80	0.00	8.80	8.80	0.14

Remuneration	
6.10	
2.70	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.19

Influence	
5.45	
2.21	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.15

Feedback	
3.65	
2.13	
3.10	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.15

Competition	
2.51	
2.04	
1.90	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.14
Career Opportunities	
6.95	
2.04	
7.50	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.14
Mobility	3.05	2.26	2.50	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.16
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.48	
2.22	
6.90	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.15
Well-being	4.44	2.25	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.16

Security	
6.38	
2.47	
6.90	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.17
Developing Others	
4.37	
1.88	
4.40	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.13
Social Utility	5.69	2.35	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.16
Social Environment	
5.81	
1.96	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.13



 

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

42 - 49							

Idea Sharing	
5.00	
1.90	
5.00	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.19
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.55	
1.97	
5.00	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.20
Surpassing	4.55	1.90	4.40	0.60	9.40	8.80	0.19

Remuneration	
5.56	
2.84	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
10.00	
0.28

Influence	
5.37	
1.85	
5.60	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.18

Feedback	
3.80	
2.08	
3.80	
0.00	
8.10	
8.10	
0.21

Competition	
2.33	
2.07	
1.90	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.20
Career Opportunities	
7.06	
1.84	
6.90	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.18
Mobility	2.87	2.28	2.50	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.23
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.24	
2.18	
6.30	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.22
Well-being	4.14	2.05	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.20

Security	
6.31	
2.56	
6.90	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.25
Developing Others	
4.50	
1.88	
4.40	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.19
Social Utility	5.86	2.50	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.25
Social Environment	
6.08	
2.09	
6.30	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.21
 


Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

50 - 56							

Idea Sharing	
5.26	
1.94	
5.30	
0.60	
9.40	
8.80	
0.22
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.58	
1.94	
5.60	
1.90	
9.40	
7.50	
0.22
Surpassing	4.27	2.05	4.10	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.24

Remuneration	
5.44	
3.07	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.35

Influence	
5.71	
2.47	
5.60	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.28

Feedback	
3.66	
1.96	
3.80	
0.60	
9.40	
8.80	
0.23

Competition	
1.93	
2.18	
1.30	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.25
Career Opportunities	
6.32	
2.26	
6.30	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.26
Mobility	3.27	2.30	2.80	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.26
Autonomous Working Conditions	
7.07	
2.12	
7.50	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.24
Well-being	4.07	2.33	4.40	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.27

Security	
5.86	
2.82	
6.30	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.32
Developing Others	
4.85	
2.17	
5.00	
0.60	
9.40	
8.80	
0.25
Social Utility	5.99	2.36	6.30	1.30	10.00	8.70	0.27
 
Social Environment	5.91	2.07	5.60	1.30	10.00	8.70	0.24





Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

57 and above							

Idea Sharing	
5.75	
1.80	
6.30	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.24
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.89	
2.06	
6.30	
0.60	
9.40	
7.50	
0.28
Surpassing	4.13	2.21	4.40	0.00	8.80	8.80	0.30

Remuneration	
5.16	
2.60	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.35

Influence	
5.74	
2.61	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.35

Feedback	
3.17	
1.74	
3.10	
0.60	
8.10	
7.50	
0.23

Competition	
2.14	
2.39	
1.30	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.32
Career Opportunities	
5.71	
2.35	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.32
Mobility	3.57	2.53	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.34
Autonomous Working Conditions	
7.16	
2.11	
6.90	
2.50	
10.00	
7.50	
0.28
Well-being	3.82	2.14	3.80	0.00	8.80	8.80	0.29

Security	
5.45	
2.74	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.37
 
Developing Others	4.45	1.67	4.40	1.30	8.80	7.50	0.23
Social Utility	6.46	2.39	6.90	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.32

Social Environment	
6.59	
1.67	
6.90	
2.50	
10.00	
7.50	
0.23


Table 10. Motivation Score Norms Based on Study Level.


Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE
Level 1: Master’s Degree, PhD, Engineering or Business School, MBA

Idea Sharing	
5.13	
1.94	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.13
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.85	
1.80	
5.60	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.12
Surpassing	4.80	1.97	5.00	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.14

Remuneration	
5.12	
2.56	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.18

Influence	
5.74	
2.24	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.16

Feedback	
3.97	
2.11	
3.80	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.15

Competition	
2.89	
2.14	
2.50	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.15
Career Opportunities	
6.63	
1.88	
6.90	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.13
Mobility	3.16	2.12	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.15
Autonomous Working
Conditions	
6.02	
2.17	
6.30	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.15
 
Well-being	4.53	2.00	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.14

Security	
5.13	
2.50	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.17
Developing Others	
4.63	
1.91	
4.40	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.13
Social Utility	5.74	2.08	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.14

Social Environment	
5.88	
1.77	
5.60	
1.30	
9.40	
8.10	
0.12
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE
Level 2: Bachelor’s Degree, First-year Masters

Idea Sharing	
5.14	
1.82	
5.00	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.09
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.54	
1.80	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.09
Surpassing	4.43	1.90	4.40	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.10

Remuneration	
5.54	
2.55	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.13

Influence	
5.27	
2.05	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10

Feedback	
3.85	
1.95	
3.80	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10

Competition	
2.92	
2.06	
2.50	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.10
Career Opportunities	
6.59	
2.04	
6.90	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10
Mobility	3.43	2.21	3.10	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.11
 
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.96	
2.17	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.11
Well-being	4.63	1.99	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10

Security	
5.81	
2.39	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.12
Developing Others	
4.60	
1.89	
4.40	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.10
Social Utility	5.66	2.25	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.11
Social Environment	
5.80	
1.88	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.10
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Level 3: 2 years of Vocational or University Studies

Idea Sharing	
5.13	
1.95	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.16
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.44	
1.94	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.16
Surpassing	4.01	2.02	3.80	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.17

Remuneration	
6.15	
2.75	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.23

Influence	
5.20	
2.17	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.18

Feedback	
3.78	
1.99	
3.80	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.17

Competition	
2.67	
2.38	
1.90	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.20
 

Career Opportunities	6.54	2.20	6.90	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.19
Mobility	3.45	2.41	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.20
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.57	
2.26	
6.30	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.19
Well-being	4.17	2.29	3.80	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.19

Security	
6.34	
2.47	
6.90	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.21
Developing Others	
4.18	
1.88	
3.80	
0.60	
8.80	
8.20	
0.16
Social Utility	5.91	2.39	5.60	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.20
Social Environment	
5.63	
2.17	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.18
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Level 4: High School Diploma

Idea Sharing	
4.42	
1.76	
4.40	
1.30	
9.40	
8.10	
0.18
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.12	
1.85	
5.00	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.19
Surpassing	4.24	1.91	4.40	0.60	9.40	8.80	0.20

Remuneration	
6.36	
2.30	
6.30	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.24

Influence	
5.05	
2.05	
5.00	
1.30	
9.40	
8.10	
0.21
 
Feedback	4.12	2.14	4.40	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.22

Competition	
2.54	
2.28	
1.90	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.24
Career Opportunities	
6.92	
1.93	
6.90	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.20
Mobility	3.27	2.08	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.22
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.41	
2.20	
6.90	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.23
Well-being	4.44	2.13	4.40	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.22

Security	
6.54	
2.06	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.21
Developing Others	
4.39	
1.93	
4.40	
0.00	
8.80	
8.80	
0.20
Social Utility	5.69	2.47	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.46	0.26
Social Environment	
5.65	
2.04	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.21
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Level 5: Trades Training, No High School Diploma

Idea Sharing	
5.31	
2.35	
5.60	
1.30	
8.80	
7.50	
0.61
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.25	
1.67	
5.60	
1.30	
8.10	
6.80	
0.43
Surpassing	4.64	1.47	4.40	2.50	8.10	5.60	0.38
 
Remuneration	5.73	2.74	6.90	0.00	8.80	8.80	0.71

Influence	
4.97	
2.41	
5.60	
1.30	
8.80	
7.50	
0.62

Feedback	
4.01	
1.68	
3.80	
1.90	
7.50	
5.60	
0.43

Competition	
4.05	
1.69	
4.40	
0.60	
7.50	
6.90	
0.44
Career Opportunities	
5.10	
1.88	
5.00	
1.90	
9.40	
7.50	
0.49
Mobility	3.72	1.89	3.80	0.00	6.30	6.30	0.49
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.77	
1.94	
5.60	
3.10	
10.00	
6.90	
0.50
Well-being	4.59	2.08	4.40	0.60	8.10	7.50	0.54

Security	
5.84	
2.64	
5.00	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.68
Developing Others	
5.44	
2.01	
6.30	
1.30	
8.80	
7.50	
0.52
Social Utility	5.05	1.81	4.40	2.50	9.40	6.90	0.47
Social Environment	
5.72	
1.91	
5.60	
3.10	
10.00	
6.90	
0.49
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Level 6: Students							

Idea Sharing	
5.37	
1.77	
5.30	
3.10	
7.50	
4.40	
0.51
 
Intellectual Curiosity	5.65	2.10	5.30	2.50	9.40	6.90	0.61

Surpassing	
4.65	
2.10	
4.40	
0.60	
8.10	
7.50	
0.61

Remuneration	
4.75	
2.03	
5.00	
0.60	
6.90	
6.30	
0.59

Influence	
4.35	
2.20	
4.10	
0.60	
6.90	
6.30	
0.64

Feedback	
4.18	
1.93	
4.40	
1.30	
6.90	
5.60	
0.56

Competition	
4.08	
1.70	
3.80	
1.90	
6.90	
5.00	
0.49

Career Opportunities	
5.89	
1.46	
5.60	
3.80	
8.10	
4.30	
0.42

Mobility	
3.91	
1.10	
3.80	
2.50	
5.60	
3.10	
0.32

Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.53	
2.15	
5.30	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.62

Well-being	
5.53	
1.87	
5.00	
3.80	
10.00	
6.20	
0.54

Security	
4.76	
2.06	
5.00	
0.60	
6.90	
6.30	
0.59

Developing Others	
5.58	
1.39	
5.95	
3.10	
7.50	
4.40	
0.40

Social Utility	
5.17	
1.91	
4.70	
2.50	
8.10	
5.60	
0.55

Social Environment	
5.80	
1.86	
5.00	
3.80	
8.80	
5.00	
0.54
 
 





Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Not Defined							

Idea Sharing	
4.62	
1.84	
5.00	
1.90	
7.50	
5.60	
0.55
Intellectual Curiosity	
4.95	
1.58	
5.60	
1.90	
6.90	
5.00	
0.48
Surpassing	3.43	1.55	3.80	1.30	5.60	4.30	0.47

Remuneration	
6.15	
2.48	
5.60	
2.50	
9.40	
6.90	
0.75

Influence	
4.10	
1.80	
4.40	
0.60	
7.50	
6.90	
0.54

Feedback	
4.28	
2.82	
3.80	
0.00	
8.10	
8.10	
0.85

Competition	
1.93	
2.13	
1.90	
0.00	
5.60	
5.60	
0.64
Career Opportunities	
6.55	
1.87	
6.30	
3.10	
9.40	
6.30	
0.56
Mobility	4.61	2.21	5.00	1.30	8.80	7.50	0.67
Autonomous Working Conditions	
7.23	
2.32	
8.10	
3.10	
9.40	
6.30	
0.70
Well-being	5.01	2.09	5.60	1.30	7.50	6.20	0.63

Security	
6.72	
1.68	
6.90	
4.40	
9.40	
5.00	
0.51
Developing Others	
4.45	
2.24	
4.40	
1.30	
8.10	
6.80	
0.67
 
Social Utility	5.41	2.59	5.60	1.30	10.00	8.70	0.78
Social Environment	
5.75	
2.50	
5.00	
1.30	
9.40	
8.10	
0.75


Table 11. Motivation Score Norms based on Country of Origin.


Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

USA							

Idea Sharing	
4.78	
1.83	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.08
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.41	
1.84	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.08
Surpassing	4.05	1.83	4.40	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.08

Remuneration	
6.18	
2.51	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.11

Influence	
5.27	
2.10	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09

Feedback	
3.71	
2.08	
3.80	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09

Competition	
2.77	
2.26	
2.50	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.10
Career Opportunities	
6.68	
2.13	
6.90	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09
Mobility	3.36	2.32	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.49	
2.15	
6.30	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09
Well-being	4.35	2.11	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.09
 
Security	6.44	2.26	6.30	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.10
Developing Others	
4.23	
1.85	
4.40	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.08
Social Utility	5.72	2.38	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.10
Social Environment	
5.75	
2.02	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.09
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

India							

Idea Sharing	
5.36	
1.63	
5.60	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.11
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.38	
1.63	
5.60	
1.90	
10.00	
8.10	
0.11
Surpassing	5.05	1.75	5.00	0.00	9.40	9.40	0.12

Remuneration	
4.92	
2.01	
5.00	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.14

Influence	
5.04	
1.85	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.13

Feedback	
4.51	
1.73	
4.40	
0.60	
8.80	
8.20	
0.12

Competition	
4.25	
1.80	
4.40	
0.00	
8.10	
8.10	
0.12
Career Opportunities	
5.92	
1.63	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.11
Mobility	3.92	1.97	3.80	0.00	8.80	8.80	0.13
 
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.35	
1.84	
5.60	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.13
Well-being	5.07	1.76	5.00	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.12

Security	
4.83	
1.82	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.12
Developing Others	
5.06	
1.66	
5.00	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.11
Social Utility	5.22	1.86	5.00	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.13
Social Environment	
5.30	
1.59	
5.00	
1.30	
9.40	
8.10	
0.11
							

Factor	
Mean	
SD	
Median	
Min	
Max	
Range	
SE

Others							

Idea Sharing	
5.39	
2.02	
5.00	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.17
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.99	
1.94	
6.30	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.16
Surpassing	5.02	2.23	5.00	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.18

Remuneration	
4.77	
2.69	
5.00	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.22

Influence	
5.70	
2.45	
5.60	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.20

Feedback	
4.22	
2.13	
4.40	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.18

Competition	
2.23	
1.96	
1.90	
0.00	
9.40	
9.40	
0.16
 
Career Opportunities	6.51	2.03	6.90	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.17
Mobility	3.27	2.09	3.10	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.17
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.80	
2.24	
5.60	
1.30	
10.00	
8.70	
0.19
Well-being	4.40	1.98	4.40	0.00	10.00	10.00	0.16

Security	
4.81	
2.65	
4.70	
0.00	
10.00	
10.00	
0.22
Developing Others	
5.08	
1.84	
5.00	
0.60	
8.80	
8.20	
0.15
Social Utility	5.86	2.15	5.60	0.60	10.00	9.40	0.18
Social Environment	
6.13	
1.75	
6.30	
0.60	
10.00	
9.40	
0.15
 
6.	Reliability
Reliability refers to the extent to which an assessment is free from error and the degree to which items on a scale are measuring the same construct. For a measure to be reliable, the same results must be consistently generated over time. Reliability is important for an assessment as it enables us to have confidence that scores on a test are really typical of an individual’s behaviour or attitude. A primary concern, when developing and using tests, is the extent to which random measurement errors influence test performance. If a test is unreliable, it is impossible for it to be valid as accuracy of results (validity) depends on the consistency with which the same results are produced. High reliability of an assessment helps to guard against biases that may be caused from errors in human judgment during the recruitment and selection process.

6.1.	Empirical Reliability
Reliability indicates the degree of precision of the measurement of a test and is, in general, defined as the proportion of the variance of the true score and the variance of the observed test score (i.e. the amount of variance in the measured test score reflecting true differences of the participants). Per definition, reliability takes a value between 0 (only error variance) to 1 (only true variance).

As recommended by Brown & Maydeu-Olivares (2012) and du Trois (2013), reliability for MOTIVATION+ was estimated as empirical reliability. In this approach, the error variance is approximated by the measurement error observed in the posterior distribution of the estimated trait scores. Consequently, the reliability estimates are directly dependent on the observed credibility of the estimated trait scores. It is important to keep in mind that this credibility is not uniform across the whole scale but - depending on the item difficulties - specific to a certain trait estimate (more extreme traits are usually measured with less precision). The reliability estimates below can accordingly be seen as an average of reliabilities over the range of all observed trait scores of a specific trait.

The reliability for MOTIVATION+ was computed on the English-speaking sample (n = 915), and can be seen in Table 12. The median reliability over all subscales of MOTIVATION+ is 0.79.

Table 12. Empirical Reliability for All Factors.

Factor	Reliability
Idea Sharing	0.57
Appraisal	0.61
 

Social Environment	0.60
Intellectual Curiosity	0.47
Social Utility	0.69
Autonomous Working Conditions	0.66
Mobility	0.68
Career Opportunities	0.64
Remuneration	0.77
Developing Others	0.61
Influence	0.63
Surpassing	0.55
Competition	0.74
Well-being	0.63
Security	0.76
 
7.	Validity
Validity refers to the extent to which an assessment measures what it claims to measure, and that this is well-founded and accurately corresponds to actual behaviour. In psychometrics, validity relates to the degree to which practical evidence and scientific theory support the interpretations of test scores. Therefore, a test can be reliable but not valid (one can consistently get the wrong answer) but it cannot be valid without being reliable, as confidence in the accuracy of results depends on the consistency with which we obtain the same results. Established validity protects practitioners from faulty, costly, unethical and legally risky decisions.

Validity is derived from the Latin word ‘validus’, meaning strong. According to the Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing (Standards; APA, AERA, & NCME, 2014), validation is a process of providing evidence for the scientific basis of interpreting assessment scores. The process of validation therefore depends on evidence supporting:
a) test content, b) response processes, c) internal structure, d) relations to other variables, and e) consequences of testing. MOTIVATION+ was validated by following a thorough multistage process that ensured items and factors were accurate, representative, consistent, clear, fair and culturally-free.

7.1.	Concurrent Validity

Concurrent validity measures whether a method is concurrent with the results of another similar, tried and tested method. In this case, in order to establish concurrent validity for MOTIVATION+, the components of the assessment must strongly correlate with corresponding components on other established motivation-based questionnaires. Concurrent validity also requires that the two tests are taken at the same time, or with little time between them, so that the correlation is pure and unaltered by changes over time. This chapter details the results of the concurrent validity study of MOTIVATION+ and the Munster Work value Measure (MWVM).

7.1.1.	The Munster Work Value Measure (MWVM)

The Munster Work Value Measure (MWVM) covers 21 work values from five value clusters. Table 13 shows the correlations between the factors of MOTIVATION+ and MWVM.
 
Table 13. Correlation between Factors of MWVM and MOTIVATION+.

MOTIV- ATION ⇨

MWVM
⇩	
Autono- mous Working Conditio
-ns	
Career Opport- unities	

Surpas- sing	

Compe- tition	
Develo- ping Others	

Apprai- sal	

Influen- ce	
Intellec- tual Curiosi- ty	

Mobility	

Idea Sharing	

Remun- eration	

Security	
Social Enviro- nment	

Social Utility	

Well- being
Apprec- iation	
-0.04	
0.02	
0.05	
0.15	
-0.10	
0.19	
0.01	
-0.15	
0.02	
-0.11	
-0.07	
-0.17	
-0.05	
0.18	
0.05
Self- realizat- ion	
-0.12	
0.04	
0.09	
0.05	
0.03	
0.01	
-0.08	
0.05	
0.01	
0.15	
-0.19	
-0.18	
0.00	
0.16	
0.08
Security	0.02	0.24	-0.20	-0.17	-0.14	-0.10	0.00	0.02	-0.21	-0.20	0.26	0.40	-0.03	0.03	-0.08
Enjoy- ment	
-0.03	
0.07	
0.04	
0.00	
-0.06	
-0.05	
-0.09	
-0.04	
0.00	
-0.04	
-0.06	
-0.11	
0.16	
0.11	
0.11
Auton- omy	
0.30	
0.10	
-0.21	
-0.15	
-0.16	
-0.19	
0.19	
0.04	
-0.12	
-0.06	
0.18	
0.07	
0.03	
-0.06	
-0.05
Money	-0.01	0.33	-0.11	-0.02	-0.17	-0.06	0.08	-0.03	-0.15	-0.38	0.50	0.19	-0.17	-0.21	-0.04
Leisure Time	
0.16	
0.08	
-0.28	
-0.14	
-0.03	
-0.20	
0.08	
0.00	
-0.11	
0.02	
0.11	
0.10	
0.12	
-0.09	
0.10
Variety	-0.01	0.00	-0.08	-0.01	-0.06	-0.08	-0.06	0.17	0.15	0.04	-0.10	-0.06	0.04	0.08	-0.01
 

Social Contact	-0.22	-0.14	0.07	0.16	0.13	-0.04	-0.09	-0.06	0.17	0.20	-0.36	-0.33	0.23	0.28	0.15
Advanc- ement	
-0.12	
0.45	
0.04	
-0.08	
-0.06	
-0.10	
0.05	
0.12	
-0.18	
-0.23	
0.17	
0.04	
-0.15	
0.00	
0.00
Achiev- ement	
-0.09	
0.12	
0.12	
-0.07	
-0.10	
-0.06	
0.00	
0.13	
-0.13	
0.04	
0.01	
-0.05	
0.03	
0.05	
0.05
Stability	0.02	0.25	-0.20	-0.21	-0.06	-0.15	0.05	0.06	-0.24	-0.06	0.21	0.32	-0.01	-0.03	-0.06
Learni- ng	
-0.27	
0.03	
0.25	
-0.02	
0.10	
0.07	
-0.09	
0.23	
0.08	
0.12	
-0.26	
-0.20	
-0.01	
0.16	
0.02
Status	-0.24	0.13	0.19	0.13	-0.02	0.11	0.02	-0.02	0.06	-0.15	-0.03	-0.13	-0.15	0.03	0.07

Helping	
-0.35	
-0.17	
0.16	
0.06	
0.12	
0.12	
-0.17	
-0.02	
0.14	
0.24	
-0.38	
-0.35	
0.20	
0.53	
0.05
Interest- ing Work	
-0.14	
0.01	
0.13	
-0.09	
0.05	
-0.14	
-0.12	
0.12	
0.04	
0.20	
-0.16	
-0.19	
0.21	
0.15	
0.07
Meani- ngful Work	
-0.14	
0.16	
0.03	
-0.13	
0.11	
-0.10	
-0.13	
-0.02	
-0.04	
0.10	
-0.18	
-0.14	
0.18	
0.30	
0.09
Health	-0.23	0.00	0.02	0.03	0.13	-0.02	-0.25	-0.04	0.02	0.17	-0.20	-0.19	0.12	0.12	0.36

Legacy	
-0.23	
-0.13	
0.12	
0.19	
-0.01	
0.12	
-0.09	
-0.12	
0.23	
0.06	
-0.24	
-0.28	
0.02	
0.22	
0.18
 

Influen- ce	-0.23	-0.08	0.21	0.22	0.00	0.10	-0.04	-0.09	0.13	0.03	-0.17	-0.20	-0.01	0.10	0.09
Genera- tivity	
-0.42	
-0.18	
0.25	
0.17	
0.21	
0.04	
-0.21	
0.04	
0.20	
0.22	
-0.35	
-0.36	
0.10	
0.30	
0.18
 
The correlation coefficient is a numerical way to quantify the relationship between two variables, and ranges between -1 and 1. The closer the value to 1, the stronger the relationship. The strongest correlation for the factor Autonomous Working Condition lies with Autonomy (0.30). The strongest correlation for the factor Competition lies with Influence (0.22). For the factor Career Opportunities, the strongest correlation lies with Advancement (0.45). For the factor Intellectual Curiosity, the strongest correlation lies with Learning (0.23). For the factor Surpassing, the strongest correlation lies with Learning (0.25) and Generativity (0.25). For the factor Idea-Sharing, the strongest correlation lies with Helping (0.24). The strongest correlation for the factor Well-being lies with Health (0.36). For the factor Influence, the strongest correlation lies with Autonomy (0.19). The strongest correlation for the factor Remuneration lies with Money (0.50). For the factor Mobility, the strongest correlation lies with Legacy (0.23) and for the factor Security, the strongest correlation lies with Security (0.40). The strongest correlation for the factor Social Environment lies with Social Contact (0.23). For the factor Social Utility, the strongest correlation lies with Helping (0.50). The strongest correlation for the factor Developing Others lies with Generativity (0.21) and for the factor Appraisal, it lies with Appreciation (0.19).

7.2.	Construct Validity
Construct validity refers to the appropriateness of inferences made on the basis of observation or measurement. Construct validity is essential to the overall validity (perceived and actual) of a scale and is particularly valuable when there is much subjectivity to concepts. When a construct is not clearly or thoroughly defined, we are unable to make direct inferences between the construct and other behaviours (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955). Often there is no accepted unit of measurement for constructs; even fairly well-known concepts such as intelligence are open to debate. Therefore, the construct validity of a scale may be threatened if the construct is: a) defined as too broad or too narrow, b) mislabelled as a specific dimension of or component within the construct, c) confounded by other related constructs that mask the effects of the main construct, or d) the construct was developed with insufficient research. Therefore, in order to develop a scale that measures motivations, values and satisfaction at work, the construct must reflect known theories that define it, identify the components that it is comprised of and pinpoints positive and negative attributes associated with each dimension. For work- based assessments, construct validity is particularly important as it: a) adds legitimacy and acceptability to the standardised measurement of employee behaviours, b) facilitates understanding of organisational implications of findings, and c) enables organisations and individuals to tailor interventions to meet desired performance targets. For MOTIVATION+, construct validity was established using two approaches: factor correlations and confirmatory factor analysis.

7.2.1.	Inter-factor Correlations

The factors in MOTIVATION+ measure motivations, values and satisfaction at work, however, they all measure different factors of it. In other words, if someone scores highly
 
on one factor, it does not mean that they will score highly on all factors. As mentioned in Chapter 7.1.1., the correlation coefficient is a numerical way to quantify the relationship between two variables, and ranges between -1 and 1. The closer the value to 1, the stronger the relationship. The correlation coefficient does not imply causality; it merely signifies the association between two variables. Traditionally, factor correlations are measured using Pearson (1895) correlation.
 
Table 14. Inter-factor Correlations.

	
Idea Sharing	Intellec- tual Curiosi- ty	
Surpass
-ing	
Remun- eration	
Influen- ce	
Apprai- sal	
Compet
-ition	
Career Oppor- tunities	

Mobility	Auton- omous Working Conditi-
ons	
Well- being	

Security	
Develo- ping Others	
Social Utility
Intellectual
Curiosity	0.06													
Surpassing	-0.10	0.11												
Remuneration	-0.49	-0.18	-0.24											
Influence	-0.15	0.02	0.12	0.15										
Appraisal	-0.13	-0.14	0.29	-0.10	-0.08									
Competition	-0.16	-0.19	0.30	-0.15	-0.13	0.30								
Career Opportunities	-0.38	0.04	-0.04	0.41	0.18	-0.07	-0.47							
Mobility	0.03	0.02	0.12	-0.27	-0.21	0.00	0.35	-0.48						
Autonomous Working
Conditions	
-0.14	
0.00	
-0.42	
0.22	
0.21	
-0.37	
-0.29	
0.09	
-0.11					
Well-being	0.14	-0.03	-0.03	-0.28	-0.42	0.05	0.16	-0.17	0.03	-0.16				
Security	-0.29	-0.06	-0.45	0.40	-0.03	-0.29	-0.25	0.28	-0.19	0.15	-0.24			
Developing Others	0.28	-0.25	-0.07	-0.31	-0.30	0.04	0.10	-0.25	-0.09	-0.33	0.22	-0.17		
Social Utility	0.25	-0.10	-0.18	-0.25	-0.23	-0.11	-0.23	-0.08	0.01	-0.09	-0.22	-0.09	0.07	
Social Environment	0.39	-0.14	-0.20	-0.33	-0.19	-0.30	-0.32	-0.20	-0.18	0.05	0.12	-0.09	0.26	0.31
 
7.3.	MOTIVATION+ and Equal Opportunities
Organisations are increasingly under pressure to ensure that tools used to inform employee recruitment, selection, development, promotion and performance measurement decisions are fair, objective and accurate. This pressure stems from a progressively knowledgeable applicant pool, a more sophisticated labour force and stringent local and international employment legislation and testing standards. Equal opportunities therefore represent a critical consideration for any modern-day work assessment, and an assessment is only considered to be truly valid when it is appropriate for use with different groups. MOTIVATION+ is a fair and accurate measure of an individual’s motivations, values and satisfaction at work, and HR practitioners and psychologists can be confident of its application.

Measurement Equivalence

Measurement Equivalence (ME) refers to the consistency of measurement across some specified group demarcation such as nationality, ethnicity and gender. The focus of ME is to ensure that individuals from different groups with the same standing on an attribute have the same set of observations on an assessment (Drasgow, 1987; McLeary & Cruise, 2012). ME helps to determine the extent to which respondents are interpreting items similarly, and identified differences across groups reflect actual differences in the trait being measured (Drasgow, 1987). One approach to assessing measurement equivalence is differential item functioning analysis.

T-tests and ANOVA

To explore the differences between groups in the sample, an independent sample t-test was performed between the groups; t-tests and ANOVA were performed between genders, age groups, study levels, and countries of origin.

Gender

In order to check for differences in scores between genders, an independent sample t- test was conducted to compare all the MOTIVATION+ factors between females (n = 465) and males (n = 399) (see Table 15).

Table 15. T-tests for Factors by Gender.


Factor	
Female	
Male	
T.	
df	
P

Idea Sharing	
5.04	
5.08	
-0.27	
862	
0.78
 
Intellectual Curiosity	5.45	5.66	-1.65	862	0.10

Surpassing	
4.34	
4.52	
-1.30	
862	
0.20

Remuneration	
5.74	
5.49	
1.45	
862	
0.15

Influence	
5.20	
5.45	
-1.71	
862	
0.10

Appraisal	
3.90	
3.93	
-0.24	
862	
0.81

Competition	
2.65	
3.10	
-3.10	
862	
0.00

Career Opportunities	
6.72	
6.44	
2.08	
862	
0.04

Mobility	
3.36	
3.39	
-0.20	
862	
0.85
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.19	
6.06	
0.90	
862	
0.37
Well-being	4.42	4.65	-1.69	862	0.09

Security	
5.95	
5.64	
1.87	
862	
0.06

Developing Others	
4.45	
4.65	
-1.49	
862	
0.14

Social Utility	
5.91	
5.47	
2.89	
862	
0.00

Social Environment	
5.87	
5.66	
1.54	
862	
0.12


The t-tests found that there were statistically significant differences between the groups, with females scoring higher than males on Career Opportunities and Social Utility; and males scoring higher than females on Competition.
 
Age Group

In order to check for differences in scores between age group, an ANOVA was conducted to compare all MOTIVATION+ factors between five age groups: 18 – 25 (n = 158), 26 – 33 (n = 262), 34 – 41 (n = 211), 42 – 49 (n = 102), 50 – 56 (n = 76), and 57+ (n = 55) (see Table
16).


Table 16. ANOVA by Age Group.


Factor	
18-25	
26-33	
34-41	
42-49	
50-56	
57+	
F	
df	
p-value

Idea Sharing	
5.17	
4.90	
4.94	
5.00	
5.26	
5.75	
2.317*10^35	
5	
0.042
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.39	
5.72	
5.33	
5.55	
5.58	
5.89	
1.68*10^35	
5	
0.137
Surpassing	4.95	4.50	4.00	4.55	4.27	4.13	4.989*10^35	5	0.000

Remuneration	
5.06	
5.76	
6.10	
5.56	
5.44	
5.16	
3.573*10^35	
5	
0.003

Influence	
4.97	
5.18	
5.45	
5.37	
5.71	
5.74	
2.169*10^35	
5	
0.056

Appraisal	
4.34	
4.14	
3.65	
3.80	
3.66	
3.17	
4.677*10^35	
5	
0.000

Competition	
3.71	
3.24	
2.51	
2.33	
1.93	
2.14	
13.78*10^35	
5	
5.78
Career Opportunities	
6.28	
6.57	
6.95	
7.06	
6.32	
5.71	
5.774*10^35	
5	
2.98
Mobility	3.85	3.55	3.05	2.87	3.27	3.57	3.987*10^35	5	0.001
Autonomous Working Conditions	
5.46	
5.72	
6.48	
6.24	
7.07	
7.16	
11.8*10^35	
5	
4.71
Well-being	4.97	4.76	4.44	4.14	4.07	3.82	5.08*10^35	5	0.000

Security	
5.05	
5.67	
6.38	
6.31	
5.86	
5.45	
6.921*10^35	
5	
2.40
 
Developing Others	4.88	4.43	4.37	4.50	4.85	4.45	1.947*10^35	5	0.084
Social Utility	5.43	5.58	5.69	5.86	5.99	6.46	2.219*10^35	5	0.051
Social Environment	
5.66	
5.48	
5.81	
6.08	
5.91	
6.59	
4.021*10^35	
5	
0.001


The ANOVA found that there were significant differences for all 15 of the factors of MOTIVATION+. Post-hoc analysis was conducted using pairwise t-tests (Bonferroni correction) in order to see where these differences occurred:

For Idea Sharing, those in the age group 57+ (M = 5.75) scored higher than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 5.17, p = 0.049), 26-33 (M = 4.90, p = 0.002), 34-41 (M = 4.94, p =
0.005), and 42-49 (M = 5.00, p = 0.018).

For Intellectual Curiosity, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 5.33) scored lower than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.72, p = 0.022). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 5.89) scored higher than those in the age group 34-41 (M = 5.33, p = 0.045).

For Surpassing, those in the age group 26-33 (M = 4.50) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.95, p = 0.021). Those in the age group 34-41 (M = 4.00) scored lower than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 4.50, p = 0.005). Those in the age group 42- 49 (M = 4.55) scored higher than those in the age group 34-41 (M = 4.00, p = 0.018). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 4.27) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.95, p = 0.011). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 4.13) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.95, p = 0.006).

For Remuneration, those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.76) scored higher than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 5.06, p = 0.007). Those in the age group 34-41 (M = 6.10) scored higher than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 5.06, p < 0.001). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 5.16) scored lower than those in the age group 34-41 (M = 6.10, p = 0.016).

For Influence, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 5.45) scored higher than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.97, p = 0.032). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 5.71) scored higher than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.97, p = 0.022).

For Appraisal, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 3.65) scored lower than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 4.34, p = 0.001), and 26-33 (M = 4.14, p = 0.009). Those in the age group 42-29 (M = 3.80) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.34, p = 0.033). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 3.66) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.34, p = 0.014). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 3.17) scored lower than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 4.34, p < 0.001), and 26-33 (M = 4.14, p = 0.001).

For Competition, those in the age group 26-33 (M = 3.24) scored lower than those in the
 
age group 18-25 (M = 3.71, p = 0.023). Those in the age group 34-41 (M = 2.51) scored lower than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 3.24, p = < 0.001). Those in the age group 42-49 (M = 2.33) scored lower than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 3.24, p = < 0.001). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 1.93) scored lower than those in the age group 34-41 (M = 2.51, p = 0.038). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 2.14) scored lower than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 3.24, p = < 0.001).

For Career Opportunities, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 6.95) scored higher than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 6.28, p = 0.001), and 26-33 (M = 6.57, p = 0.037). Those in the age group 42-29 (M = 7.06) scored higher than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 6.28, p = 0.002), and 26-33 (M = 6.57, p = 0.034). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 6.32) scored lower than those in the age groups 34-41 (M = 6.95, p = 0.017), and 42-49 (M = 7.06, p = 0.014). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 5.71) scored lower than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 6.57, p = 0.004).

For Mobility, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 3.05) scored lower than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 3.85, p = < 0.001), and 26-33 (M = 3.55, p = 0.014). Those in the age group 42-29 (M = 2.87) scored lower than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 3.85, p = < 0.001), and 26-33 (M = 3.55, p = 0.008).

For Autonomous Working Conditions, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 6.48) scored higher than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.72, p = < 0.001). Those in the age group 42-49 (M = 6.24) scored higher than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 5.46, p = 0.004), and 26-33 (M = 5.72, p = 0.039). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 7.07) scored higher than those in the age groups 34-41 (M = 6.48, p = 0.037), and 42-49 (M = 6.24, p = 0.010). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 7.16) scored higher than those in the age groups 34-41 (M = 6.48, p = 0.037), and 42-49 (M = 6.24, p = 0.010).

For Well-being, those in the age group 34-41 (M = 4.44) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.97, p = 0.014). Those in the age group 42-49 (M = 4.14) scored lower than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 4.97, p = 0.001), and 26-33 (M = 4.76, p = 0.009). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 4.07) scored lower than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 4.97, p = < 0.001), 26-33 (M = 4.76, p = 0.002), and 34-41 (M = 4.44, p = 0.043).

For Security, those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.67) scored higher than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 5.05, p = 0.010). Those in the age group 34-41 (M = 6.38) scored higher than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.67, p = 0.001). Those in the age group 42-49 (M
= 6.31) scored higher than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.67, p = 0.023). Those in the age group 50-56 (M = 5.86) scored higher than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 5.05, p
= 0.020). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 5.45) scored lower than those in the age groups 34-41 (M = 6.38, p = 0.010), and 42-49 (M = 6.31, p = 0.032).

For Developing Others, those in the age group 26-33 (M = 4.43) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.88, p = 0.018). Those in the age group 34-41 (M = 4.37) scored lower than those in the age group 18-25 (M = 4.88, p = 0.012).
 
For Social Utility, those in the age group 57+ (M = 6.46) scored higher than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 5.43, p = 0.004), 26-33 (M = 5.58, p = 0.008), and 34-41 (M = 5.69, p
= 0.023).

For Social Environment, those in the age group 42-49 (M = 6.08) scored higher than those in the age group 26-33 (M = 5.48, p = 0.007). Those in the age group 57+ (M = 6.59) scored higher than those in the age groups 18-25 (M = 5.66, p = 0.002), 34-41 (M = 5.81, p = 0.007), and 50-56 (M = 5.91, p = 0.046).

Country of Origin

In order to check for differences in scores between countries of origin, an ANOVA was conducted to compare all MOTIVATION+ factors between three 3 categories: USA (n = 493), India (n = 205), and Others (n = 166) (see Table 18).

Table 18. ANOVA by Country of Origin.


Factor	
USA	
India	
Others	
F	
df	
p-value

Idea Sharing	
4.78	
5.36	
5.39	
11.847*10^35	
2	
0.000

Intellectual Curiosity	
5.41	
5.38	
5.99	
5.851*10^35	
2	
0.003

Surpassing	
4.05	
5.05	
5.02	
30.558*10^35	
2	
0.000

Remuneration	
6.18	
4.92	
4.77	
33.765*10^35	
2	
0.000

Influence	
5.27	
5.04	
5.70	
3.827*10^35	
2	
0.023

Appraisal	
3.71	
4.51	
4.22	
15.554*10^35	
2	
0.000

Competition	
2.77	
4.25	
2.23	
64.087*10^35	
2	
0.000

Career Opportunities	
6.68	
5.92	
6.51	
14.365*10^35	
2	
0.000

Mobility	
3.36	
3.92	
3.27	
6.881*10^35	
2	
0.001
 
Autonomous Working Conditions	6.49	5.35	5.80	27.908*10^35	2	0.000
Well-being	4.35	5.07	4.40	12.491*10^35	2	0.000

Security	
6.44	
4.83	
4.81	
62.388*10^35	
2	
0.000

Developing Others	
4.23	
5.06	
5.08	
24.244*10^35	
2	
0.000

Social Utility	
5.72	
5.22	
5.86	
6.253*10^35	
2	
0.002

Social Environment	
5.75	
5.30	
6.13	
11.142*10^35	
2	
0.000


The ANOVA found that there were significant differences for 10 of the factors of MOTIVATION+. Post-hoc analysis was conducted using pairwise t-tests (Bonferroni correction) in order to see where these differences occurred:

For Intellectual Curiosity, those in the category India (M = 5.38) scored lower than those in the category Others (M = 5.99, p = 0.003). Those in the category Others (M = 5.99) scored higher than those in the category USA (M = 5.41, p = 0.002).

For Influence, those in the category India (M = 5.04) scored lower than those in the category Others (M = 5.70, p = 0.011). Those in the category Others (M = 5.70) scored higher than those in the category USA (M = 5.27, p = 0.045).

For Appraisal, those in the category Others (M = 4.22) scored higher than those in the category USA (M = 3.71, p = 0.011).

For Competition, those in the category Others (M = 2.23) scored lower than those in the category USA (M = 2.77, p = 0.006).

For Career Opportunities, those in the category India (M = 5.92) scored lower than those in the category Others (M = 6.51, p = 0.01).

For Mobility, those in the category India (M = 3.92) scored higher than those in the categories USA (M = 3.36, p = 0.004), and Others (M = 3.27, p = 0.008).

For Autonomous Working Conditions, those in the category India (M = 5.35) scored lower than those in the category Others (M = 5.80, p = 0.046). Those in the category Others (M = 5.80) scored lower than those in the category USA (M = 6.49, p = 0.001).

For Well-being, those in the category India (M = 5.07) scored higher than those in the
 
category Others (M = 4.40, p = 0.003).

For Social Utility, those in the category India (M = 5.22) scored lower than those in the categories USA (M = 5.72, p = 0.011), and Others (M = 5.86, p = 0.011).

For Social Environment, those in the category India (M = 5.30) scored lower than those in the category USA (M = 5.75, p = 0.005). Those in the category Others (M = 6.13) scored higher than those in the category USA (M = 5.75, p = 0.031).

Study Level

In order to check for differences in scores between study level, an ANOVA was conducted to compare all MOTIVATION+ factors between six study levels: Level 1 - Master’s Degree, PhD, Engineering or Business School, MBA (n = 208); Level 2 - Bachelor’s Degree, First-year Master’s (n = 384); Level 3 - 2 years of Vocational or University Study (n = 141); Level 4 - High School diploma (n = 93); Level 5 - Trades Training, No High School Diploma (n = 15); and Level 6 - Students (n = 12) (see Table 19).

Table 19. ANOVA by Study Level.

Factor	Level 1	Level 2	Level 3	Level 4	Level 5	Level 6	F	df	p-value
Idea Sharing	5.13	5.14	5.13	4.42	5.31	5.37	2.212*10^35	6	0.040
Intellectual Curiosity	
5.85	
5.54	
5.44	
5.12	
5.25	
5.65	
2.158*10^35	
6	
0.045
Surpassing	4.80	4.43	4.01	4.24	4.64	4.65	3.125*10^35	6	0.005
Remuneration	5.12	5.54	6.15	6.36	5.73	4.75	4.015*10^35	6	0.001
Influence	5.74	5.27	5.20	5.05	4.97	4.35	2.783*10^35	6	0.011
Appraisal	3.97	3.85	3.78	4.15	4.01	4.18	0.499*10^35	6	0.810
Competition	2.89	2.92	2.67	2.54	4.05	4.08	2.345*10^35	6	0.023
Career Opportunities	
6.63	
6.59	
6.54	
6.92	
5.10	
5.89	
2.063*10^35	
6	
0.055
Mobility	3.16	3.43	3.45	3.27	3.72	3.91	1.193*10^35	6	0.307
Autonomous Working Conditions	
6.02	
5.96	
6.57	
6.41	
5.77	
5.53	
2.368*10^35	
6	
0.028
Well-being	4.53	4.63	4.17	4.44	4.59	5.53	1.491*10^35	6	0.178
 
Security	5.13	5.81	6.34	6.54	5.84	4.76	6.098*10^35	6	2.870
Developing Others	
4.63	
4.60	
4.18	
4.39	
5.44	
5.58	
2.236*10^35	
6	
0.038
Social Utility	5.74	5.66	5.91	5.69	5.05	5.17	0.583*10^35	6	0.744
Social Environment	
5.88	
5.80	
5.64	
5.65	
5.72	
5.80	
0.307*10^35	
6	
0.934

The ANOVA found that there were significant differences for 11 of the factors of MOTIVATION+. Post-hoc analysis was conducted using pairwise t-tests (Bonferroni correction) in order to see where these differences occurred:

For Idea Sharing, those in Level 4 (M = 4.42) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.13, p = 0.002), Level 2 (M = 5.14, p = 0.001), and Level 3 (M = 5.13, p = 0.005).

For Intellectual Curiosity, those in Level 2 (M = 5.54) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M
= 5.85, p = 0.049). Those in Level 3 (M = 5.44) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.85, p = 0.037). Those in Level 4 (M = 5.12) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.85, p = 0.001), and Level 2 (M = 5.54, p = 0.048).

For Surpassing, those in Level 2 (M = 4.43) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 4.80, p
= 0.024). Those in Level 3 (M = 4.01) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 4.80, p = < 0.001), and Level 2 (M = 4.43, p = 0.027). Those in Level 4 (M = 4.24) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 4.80, p = 0.020).

For Remuneration, those in Level 3 (M = 6.15) scored higher than those in Level 1 (M = 5.12, p = < 0.001), and Level 2 (M = 5.54, p = 0.016). Those in Level 4 (M = 6.36) scored higher than those in Level 1 (M = 5.12, p = < 0.001), and Level 2 (M = 5.54, p = 0.006). Those in Level 6 (M = 4.75) scored lower than those in Level 4 (M = 6.36, p = 0.041).

For Influence, those in Level 2 (M = 5.27) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.74, p = 0.011). Those in Level 3 (M = 5.20) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.74, p = 0.021). Those in Level 4 (M = 5.05) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.74, p = 0.010). Those in Level 6 (M = 4.35) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 5.74, p = 0.028).

For Competition, those in Level 5 (M = 4.05) scored higher than those in Level 1 (M = 2.89, p = 0.045), Level 2 (M = 2.92, p = 0.048), Level 3 (M = 2.67, p = 0.018), and Level 4 (M = 2.54,
p = 0.012). Those in Level 6 (M = 4.08) scored higher than those in Level 3 (M = 2.67, p = 0.030), and Level 4 (M = 2.54, p = 0.020).

For Career Opportunities, those in Level 5 (M = 5.10) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 6.63, p = 0.005), Level 2 (M = 6.59, p = 0.005), Level 3 (M = 6.54, p = 0.008), and Level
4 (M = 6.92, p = 0.001).

For Autonomous Working Conditions, those in Level 3 (M = 6.57) scored higher than those
 
in Level 1 (M = 6.02, p = 0.021), and Level 2 (M = 5.96, p = 0.005).

For Well-being, those in Level 3 (M = 4.17) scored lower than those in Level 2 (M = 4.63, p
= 0.022). Those in Level 6 (M = 5.53) scored higher than those in Level 3 (M = 4.17, p = 0.028).

For Security, those in Level 2 (M = 5.81) scored higher than those in Level 1 (M = 5.13, p = 0.001). Those in Level 3 (M = 6.34) scored higher than those in Level 2 (M = 5.81, p = 0.026). Those in Level 4 (M = 6.54) scored higher than those in Level 2 (M = 5.81, p - 0.008). Those in Level 6 (M = 4.76) scored lower than those in Level 3 (M = 6.34, p - 0.028), and Level 4 (M = 6.54, p = 0.015).

For Developing Others, those in Level 3 (M = 4.18) scored lower than those in Level 1 (M = 4.63, p = 0.033), and Level 2 (M = 4.60, p - 0.025). Those in Level 5 (M = 5.44) scored higher than those in Level 3 (M = 4.18, p = 0.015), and Level 4 (M = 4.39, p = 0.047). Those in Level 6 (M = 5.58) scored higher than those in Level 3 (M = 4.18, p = 0.015), and Level 4 (M = 4.39,
p = 0.041).
 
8.	Additional Information and Considerations
MOTIVATION+ was developed for use in a range of organisational settings and hence, it is important that the appropriate norms, scores and interpretations are used in order to guide HR decisions for recruitment and selection, career development, coaching and performance management. Accurate interpretation of psychometric tests like MOTIVATION+ helps both administrators and candidates to: a) put the assessment into context; b) effectively compare candidates across target capabilities; c) accurately identify areas for development; d) maximise fit between job requirements and candidate motivations; and e) promote the organisation as a fair and objective place to work. The current chapter gives guidelines for HR practitioners to understand and successfully interpret candidate scores of MOTIVATION+ for different organisational objectives.

Report generation software for MOTIVATION+ provides graphs and personalised comments for all the 15 motivational factors and their corresponding satisfaction levels in relation to the candidate’s scores. The report should only be interpreted by professionals who have completed Central Test’s accredited training course and are familiar with this manual. Training in and knowledge of the assessment process are vital as scores should be interpreted in light of information regarding reliability, validity, standard error of measurement, and any accommodations to the assessment or assessment session that were made. Scores should be presented within the context of the assessment and in a clear, meaningful and appropriate way for the target audience.

8.1.	Interpreting Scores
It is important to note that all assessments by Central Test have been developed for HR purposes only. Therefore, no clinical conclusions can be drawn from the results – not even from extreme scores. There are six different levels of comments in total. Levels are determined by a candidate’s score. Table  provides an example of descriptors used to describe different levels of a factor. Extreme scores are defined as the lowest and highest possible values on a factor. For MOTIVATION+, the minimum score is set at 0 and the maximum score is set at 10. Given the ipsative format of the assessment, it is impossible to obtain extreme scores on all factors.

Each factor consists of two facets. High scores on a factor indicate that there is a high probability that the person who is being evaluated can be characterised as having an interest in that factor. Middle scores (i.e. 4-7) indicate a high congruence with the norm group and may be less of a preference for the individual. However, all comments should be viewed as hypotheses that need to be confirmed with other sources of data, such as interviews or further assessments, CV content and references.
 
Table 20. Examples of Descriptors for Different Levels of the Construct in the Report Comments for MOTIVATION+.

Level 1	Level 2	Level 3	Level 4	Level 5	Level 6

Appears to be of little importance	Somewhat a motivator but does not place importance	
Likely to be motivator but not a priority	
Appears to have an impact on motivation	

Likely to be of importance	
Likely to be of great importance

8.2.	Organisational	Need:	Career	selection,	Recruitment	and Development
For identifying 21st century work drives, MOTIVATION+ is an effective tool for both the employer, in the selection of job candidates on the basis of those motivators that drive a candidate; and the job candidate, in the successful selection of an appropriate career navigation.

Choosing an appropriate career path is a difficult task, and with the overwhelming number of fields that exist in the modern-day occupational world, it can be confusing to know which path to take. MOTIVATION+ helps candidates pinpoint their most crucial motivators, thus enabling them to make more informed career choices and find greater job satisfaction. Following this is the importance of a motivation assessment in recruitment. In order to successfully hire a candidate that will feel satisfied with their job and want to remain with the company, job satisfaction of the employee should be considered significant to the recruiter. By using MOTIVATION+, an employer will be able to infer how appropriate a job may be for a candidate based on an objective assessment of their motivators. If the endorsed motivators of a candidate do not align with those of the job role in question, there may not be a good match between the two.

Recruitment and selection is an important organisational function which can be very time consuming and expensive. Furthermore, bad recruitment decisions have additional effects on organisational productivity, capability and sustainability. It is therefore recommended that prior to administering MOTIVATION+, recruiters have a detailed job description and person specifications based on a job analysis.

MOTIVATION+ helps recruiters to customise job profiles in their client account by specifying desired scores for each factor. The assessment allows the recruiter to easily compare the target profile with a candidate’s profile.

Furthermore, MOTIVATION+ can be used in line with performance evaluations, which are a key component of employee development and success. Performance reviews should be fair and balanced assessments of an employee’s achievements and capabilities, and should give the opportunity to discuss expectations and accomplishments. MOTIVATION+
 
supports HR practitioners with performance reviews that can help to discuss job performance in relation to satisfaction at work; if an individual is not performing as they could be at work, it may be down to a lack of satisfaction in the particular area that they are working on. Identifying this can help the recruiter to identify whether or not the employee should be transferred to another area of the company, or to a different aspect of a project.

Whilst MOTIVATION+ is effective in identifying areas for development, it should not be used to directly track an employee’s performance progress. We therefore recommend the use of objective performance assessments or other evaluations in conjunction with MOTIVATION+.
                                     


СЭТГЭЛИЙН ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ
УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙГ   ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ТЕСТИЙН НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАН
































                                   


Central Test - Empowering Talent © 2026
Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.

СЭТГЭЛИЙН ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ТЕСТ



  ТАНИЛЦУУЛГА 

 	EMOTION 2 үнэлгээ нь хувь хүний өөрийн болон бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг таних, ойлгох, зохистой удирдах чадамж ба нөөцийг хэмжихэд зориулагдсан, сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамж (Emotional Intelligence, EI)-ийн психометрик хэрэгсэл юм. Энэхүү чадамж нь ажлын гүйцэтгэл, харилцаа хамтын ажиллагаа болон манлайллын үр нөлөөг дэмждэг тул хувь хүн болон байгууллагын хөгжилд суурь ач холбогдолтой.

Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны тухай орчин үеийн ойлголт нь 1990-ээд оноос П. Саловей, Ж. Майер (Salovey & Mayer) нарын бүтээлүүдэд тулгуурлан хөгжсөн. Тэд EI-ийг сэтгэл хөдлөлийг зөв таних, утгачилж ойлгох, асуудал шийдвэрлэхэд ухаалгаар ашиглах, өөрийн ба бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг зохицуулах чадварын нэгдэл хэмээн тодорхойлсон. Үнэлгээг энэ хүрээнд боловсруулж, танин мэдэхүйн процесс (таних-ойлгох) ба зохицуулалтын процесс (удирдах-хэрэглэх)-ын хэмжигдэхүүнүүдээр загварчилсан.

EMOTION 2 нь 0–10 хооронд масштабтай факторын оноо мөн нийт EI-ийн индекс (Q-quotient)-ийг тооцон гаргана. Үр дүн нь хоёр түвшинд тайлагдана:
•	(A) Ерөнхий индекс – Q-quotient: Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны нэгдсэн түвшинг илтгэнэ. Тайлангийн эхэнд байрлаж, ерөнхий үнэлгээ, харьцуулалтыг хялбарчилна.
•	(B) Факторуудын оноо: (жишээлбэл: өөрийгөө таних, бусдыг таних/эмпати, сэтгэл хөдлөлийн зохицуулалт, илэрхийлэл/харилцаа, стресстэй нөхцөл дэх уян хатан байдал гэх мэт) нь дэд чадамж бүрийн хүч ба хөгжлийн хэрэгцээг нарийвчлан харуулна.

Үнэлгээ нь “олон нийтэд таалагдах/сайн дүр төрх бүтээх хандлага”-ын үзүүлэлтийг (social desirability) давхар тооцож, өөрийгөө сайнаар илэрхийлэх хэт хандлага байвал тайлбарлахдаа засварлан анхааруулдаг. Энэ нь үнэн зөв хариулт ба тайлбарын найдвартай байдлыг хамгаалах зорилготой.


ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ЗОРИЛГО 

Энэхүү тест нь хувь хүний сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамжийг буюу өөрийн болон бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг таних, ойлгох, удирдах, зохицуулах чадварыг хэмжихэд чиглэнэ. Хувь хүний сэтгэл хөдлөлийн мэдрэмж ба зохицуулалтын түвшинг үнэлж, сэтгэл зүйн уян хатан байдал, харилцааны үр нөлөө, шийдвэр гаргалт дахь сэтгэл хөдлөлийн нөлөөг судалгааны үндсэн дээр тодорхойлох явдал юм.

ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ АРГАЧЛАЛ, АШИГЛАСАН ХЭМЖҮҮР 

▪	Ашигласан тест: EMOTION 2.1 
▪	Тестийн ангилал: Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чададжийг тодорхойлох тест 
▪	Үнэлгээний үзүүлэлт: Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж, бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж гэсэн 2 бүлгийн 15 үзүүлэлт тус бүрээр сэтгэлийн хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн түвшинг тодорхойлно. 
▪	Оноог автоматаар боловсруулж утгуудыг тогтооно
▪	Оноо 6 түвшинд хуваагдан, интерваллаар утгуудыг эрэмбэлсэн болно. 

Түвшин	Оноо 	Нэршил  Тайлбар 


1	1.0-2.9	Маш сул	Таних, ойлгох, зохицуулах чадвар хангалтгүй, стресс, зөрчилтэй нөхцөлд тогтвортой байдлаа хадгалж чаддаггүй.

2	3.0-4.4	Сул	Тогтвортой бус, нөхцөл байдлаас хамааран хэлбэлзэж, тавгүйттдэг.
3	4.5-5.9	Дундаж	
Гүйцэтгэлтэй ч, гэнэтийн дарамттай үед ажлын гүйцэтгэл хувьсамтгай.


4	6.0-7.4	Дундажаас дээгүүр	Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгож, харилцааг үр ашигтай авч явдаг, стресстэй үед ч харьцангуй тогтвортой байдаг.


5	7.5-8.9	Сайн	
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө ухаалгаар хянах, зохистой хэрэглэх чадвар тогтвортой, багийн уур амьсгал, шийдвэр гаргалтад эерэг нөлөөтэй.


6	9.0-10	Маш сайн	Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн нарийн ялгаа, динамикийг дээд түвшинд мэдэрч, ухаалгаар удирдана; манлайлал, зөрчил зохицуулалт зэрэгт мэдрэг давуу талтай хариу үйлдэл үзүүлдэг.

  

1.1 СЭТГЭЛ ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙН ЕРӨНХИЙ ОНОО
 Энэ үзүүлэлт нь сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах чадварын ерөнхий оноог илэрхийлнэ \ EQ Technical Manual\
Хүснэгт 1 Удирдах чадварын ерөнхий оноо


№	Ажилтны  нууцлалын код	Тестийн хүчин төгөлдөр байдал /6.86-с дээш оноо авсан тохиолдолд хүчингүй /	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн оноо                                                                   / 85-115 хэвийн, 116-130 дунджаас дээш/
1	859272	1.9	129
2	859252	0.9	123
3	859256	1.6	120
4	859222	3.4	118
5	859210	0.9	117
6	859214	1.3	117
7	859250	1.9	117
8	859234	2.2	116
9	859258	2.5	116
10	859238	1.3	115
11	859268	1.6	114
12	859224	0.9	113
13	859260	1.3	113
14	859228	3.1	112
15	859230	0	111
16	859254	0.9	110
17	859270	1.9	110
18	859208	1.6	110
19	859244	0.9	109
20	859248	3.8	109
21	859266	1.6	107
22	859212	4.7	106
23	859216	2.2	105
24	859246	0.6	105
25	859264	1.6	105
26	859226	0.3	103
27	859220	0.6	101
28	859236	0.9	100
29	859274	0	98
30	859232	1.6	96
31	859240	1.3	95
	Дундаж	2	110

ДҮГНЭЛТ 

      үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын  сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн ерөнхий оноо 110 байгаа нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын сэтгэл хөдлөлийн ухамсар, өөрийгөө хянах, бусадтай харилцах, дотоод болон гадаад сэтгэлзүйн зохицуулалт хэвийн хэмжээнд сайн хөгжсөн болохыг илтгэнэ. Энэ түвшин нь сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны “тогтвортой, хэвийн” үзүүлэлтэд тооцогддог бөгөөд хувь хүн өөрийн болон бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг таних, ойлгох, нөхцөл байдалд тохируулан хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэх чадвартайг илэрхийлдэг.
1.2 СЭТГЭЛ ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙН БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ 

Тайлбар: Сэтгэл хөддөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамж үзүүлэлтийг ерөнхийлөн өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж, бусадтай харилцах  оюуны чадамж гэж ангилна. Ангилал тус бүрийн дундаж оноог харуудсан болно. 

•	Бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж сэтгэл хөдлөл, хэрэгцээ, хандлага, зан төлөвийг ойлгож, хүн хоорондын харилцаанд зөв ашиглах, нийгмийн нөхцөл байдалд бүтээлчээр оролцох оюуны чадамж юм / Howard Gardner (1983, 1993)-ийн Multiple Intelligences Theory/
•	Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж нь хувь хүний өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, сэтгэлгээ, зан төлөв, давуу болон сул тал, үнэт зүйл, зорилгоо ухамсарлаж, энэ мэдлэгийг өөрийгөө удирдах, шийдвэр гаргах, хувь хүний хөгжилд ашиглах оюуны чадамжийг хэлнэ / Howard Gardner (1983, 1993)-ийн Multiple Intelligences Theory/ 

Хүснэгт 2. Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамж бүлэг үзүүлэлтийн оноо 

№	Ажилтны  нууцлалын код 	Бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж	Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж  
1	859210	6.7	7.1
2	859212	6.9	4.4
3	859214	6.7	7.1
4	859216	6.4	4.8
5	859220	5.1	5.2
6	859222	7	7
7	859224	6.2	6.6
8	859226	5.9	4.8
9	859228	6.4	6.2
10	859230	6.3	6.2
11	859232	4.7	4.6
12	859234	6.9	6.8
13	859236	4.9	5.1
14	859238	7.1	6.4
15	859240	3.7	5.2
16	859244	5.8	6.2
17	859246	5.8	5.1
18	859248	6	6
19	859250	7.1	6.8
20	859252	6.9	8.1
21	859254	6.5	5.6
22	859256	7.3	7.2
23	859258	7	6.7
24	859260	6.3	6.5
25	859264	5.4	5.6
26	859266	5.4	6.2
27	859268	6.5	6.6
28	859270	6.3	6
29	859272	7.8	8.7
30	859274	4.4	5.2
31	859208	6.3	5.9
 	Дундаж	6.2	6.1

Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамжийн оноо 6.1 

Өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, давуу болон сул талаа тодорхой таньж, хянах чадвар дунд түвшинд байна. Энэ нь ажилтнууд сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдлаа хадгалж чаддаг ч стресс, дарамт, өөрчлөлтийн үед сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах, урам зориг өгөх, уян хатан байх чадвар сулрах хандлагатайг харуулж байна. Тиймээс хувь хүний өөрийгөө ухамсарлах, сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдал, өөрийгөө урамшуулах чиглэлд хөгжлийн стратеги хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.

 Бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамжийн оноо 6.2 

Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг таних, ойлгох, харилцааны нөхцөлд тохирсон зан төлөв илэрхийлэх чадвар дунд түвшинд байна. Энэ нь хамтын ажиллагаанд оролцох, зөрчилдөөн зохицуулах, урам зориг өгөх чадвар байгаа ч  эмпати буюу бусдыг гүнзгий ойлгох болон харилцааны ухаалаг зохицуулалт сул байгаа нь ажиглагдлаа. Иймд байгууллагын харилцааны соёлыг гүнзгийрүүлэх, эмпати ба идэвхтэй сонсох, хамтын шийдвэр гаргах чиглэлд сургалт хөгжүүлэлтийн хөтөлбөр шаардлагатай ажиглагдаж байна

ДҮГНЭЛТ 

Сэтгэл хөддөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамж үзүүлэлтийг ерөнхийлөн өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж, бусадтай харилцах  оюуны чадамж гэж ангилсан тус үр дүнгээс хархад ажилтнууд сэтгэл хөдлөлөө тодорхой хэмжээнд ухамсарлаж, зохистой илэрхийлэх, бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгох, харилцаандаа хариуцлагатай ханддаг ч EQ-ийн гүнзгий түвшний буюу дотоод зохицуулалт ба харилцааны нөлөөллийн чадвар бүрэн  төлөвшөөгүй байгааг илтгэж байна. 



2.1 ӨӨРТЭЙГӨӨ ХАРИЛЦАХ  ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖ   
      Дотоод сэтгэлийн оюуны чадамж нь хувь хүний өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, сэтгэлгээ, үнэт зүйл, зорилго, давуу болон сул талын талаарх ухамсар, өөрийн зан төлөвийг дотоод талаас нь ойлгож, өөртөө зохицсон сонголт, шийдвэр гаргах оюуны чадамжийг хэлнэ.  Howard Gardner (1983)
Үүнд: 
•	Өөрийгөө таних чадвар 
•	Өөрийгөө үнэлэх чадвар
•	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар 
•	Өөртөө урам зориг өгөх чадвар 
•	Эерэг хандах чадвар 
•	Тэсвэр хатуужилтай байх чадвар 
•	Уян хатан байх чадвар  зэргүүд багтана. 
Тайлбар: EMOTION үнэлгээний өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж үзүүлэлт тус бүрийн үр дүнг дундаж оноо гэсэн ангилалаар үзүүлсэн бөгөөд хүн тус бүрийн дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг  хавсралт хэсгээс харж болно. 
Хүснэгт 3 Дотоод сэтгэлийн оюуны чадамж бүлгийн дундаж онооны тайлбар
№	Үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үзүүлэлт	Дундаж онооны тайлбар
1	Өөрийгөө таних чадвар	6	Дундажаас дээгүүр	Ажилтнууд өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, давуу болон сайжруулах талыг  таньж чаддаг. Гүйцэтгэл, зан төлөвийг ухамсарлан сайжруулах хандлагыг илтгэх бөгөөд өөрийгөө таних чадвар нь сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдал, шийдвэр гаргалтад дэмжлэг үзүүлдэг.

2	Өөрийгөө хянах чадвар	5.9	Дундаж	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах, нөхцөл байдалд тохируулан зан төлөвөө илэрхийлэх хандлага хөгжсө. Энэ нь байгууллагын соёл, хамтын ажиллагаанд эерэг нөлөө үзүүлдэг ч өндөр стресстэй үед дэмжлэгэ шаардлагатай байж болох юм.

3	Өөрийгөө үнэлэх	5	Дундаж	Ажилтнууд өөрийн гүйцэтгэл, хувь нэмрээ дундаж түвшинд бодитоор үнэлдэг ч зарим тохиолдолд өөртөө хэт хатуу ханддаг. Өөрийгөө зөв үнэлэх, амжилтаа хүлээн зөвшөөрөх дадлыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.

4	Өөртөө итгэлтэй	5.9	Дундаж	
Өөрийн шийдвэрт итгэлтэй, хариуцлагатай байхыг хичээдэг. Гэвч тодорхойгүй нөхцөлд эргэлзээ үүсэх, итгэлээ алдах тохиолдол ажиглагдаж болох тул тогтвортой итгэлцлийг хөгжүүлэх шаардлага ажиглагдаж байна.

5	Өөртөө урам зориг өгөх	5.3	Дундаж	Гадаад хүчин зүйлээс илүү дотоод урам зоригийг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай байна. Зорилго тодорхойлох, амжилтаа тэмдэглэх зэрэг хувь хүний дотоод сэдлийг дэмжих арга хэмжээ хэрэгтэй байдаг.

6	Эерэг хандах	5.9	Дундаж	Ерөнхийдөө өөдрөг сэтгэлгээтэй, нөхцөл байдлыг эерэгээр хүлээн авч, багийн уур амьсгалыг эерэг чиглэлд удирдах хандлагатай. Гэвч дарамттай нөхцөлд энэхүү хандлагыг тогтвортой хадгалах чадварыг сайжруулах шаардлагатай.

7	Тэсвэр хатуужилтай байх	5.6	Дундаж	Саад бэрхшээлтэй үед хичээл зүтгэл гаргах чадвар нь тогтвортой байдлаа хадгалах,  дэмжлэг хэрэгтэй. Сэтгэлзүйн тэсвэрийг нэмэгдүүлэх дасгал, хөтөлбөр хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай юм.

8	Уян хатан байх	4.6	Дундаж	Өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох, шинэ нөхцөл байдалд түргэн шилжих чадвар сул. Байгууллагын шинэчлэл, өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох сургалт, чиглэлийн хөгжлийн хөтөлбөр хэрэгтэй байна.
ӨӨРТЭЙГӨӨ ХАРИЛЦАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖ, ДҮГНЭЛТ, САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ

Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж бүлгээс хархад өөрийгөө таних, өөрийгөө хянах, эерэг хандлагын соёл төлөвшиж буйг харуулж байгаа боловч тодорхой чиглэлд хөгжүүлэх шаардлага харагдаж байна. Уян хатан байдал, өөрийгөө үнэлэх болон өөртөө урам зориг өгөх чадвар харьцангуй доогуур үнэлэгдсэн нь хувь хүний сэтгэлзүйн дасан зохицох чадамж, дотоод сэдэл болон бүтээмжийн тогтвортой байдалд нөлөөлж болзошгүй талтай юм. Тус дүгнэлтээс үүдэн сайжруулах хэд хэдэн зөвлөмжийг хүргэж байна. Үүнд: 

•	Өөрийн гүйцэтгэл, оролцоог илүү бодитоор үнэлэх, амжилтаа хүлээн зөвшөөрөх дадлыг төлөвшүүлэхийн тулд өөрийн хөгжлийн замналд суурилсан  арга зүйг нэвтрүүлэх нь зүйтэй.
•	Дотоод сэдлийг нэмэгдүүлэх зорилгоор зорилго тодорхойлох, амжилтаа үнэлэх, өөрийгөө урамшуулах хандлагыг дэмжих хэрэгтэй.
•	Өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох, шинэ нөхцөл байдалд эерэгээр хандах чадварыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.
•	Өөртэйгөө харилцах чадамжийн хөгжлийн гол зорилго нь ажилтнуудыг өөрийн үнэ цэнэ, зорилгоо ухамсарласан, дотоодоосоо идэвхждэг, сэтгэлзүйн хувьд уян хатан хувь хүн болгон төлөвшүүлэхэд чиглүүлэх байгууллагын түвшинд эдгээр чиглэлд коучинг, сэтгэлзүйн урамшууллын хөтөлбөр, EQ хөгжлийн сургалт хэрэгжүүлэхийг зөвлөж байна.


2.2 БУСАДТАЙ ХАРИЛЦАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖ 

     Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөл, хэрэгцээ, хандлагыг ойлгож, тухайн ойлголтыг харилцаа, хамтын ажиллагаанд үр дүнтэй ашиглах чадвар юм. Нийгмийн харилцааг ойлгох, удирдах, бусдад нөлөөлөх чадамж бөгөөд  үнэлгээнд энэ нь бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлд хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэх, хамт олонтойгоо зохицох, нийгмийн орчинд хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх чадвараар илэрхийлэгддэг. 
Үүнд: 
•	Эвлэрүүлэн зуучлах чадвар 
•	Бусдад урам зориг өгөх чадвар 
•	Ялгаатай байдалд зохицох чадвар 
•	Ухаалаг эв дүйтэй байх чадвар 
•	Бусдыг ойлгох чадвар 
•	Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх чадвар 
•	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэх чадвар зэрэг чадварууд багтана. 
Тайлбар: EMOTION үнэлгээний бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж бүлгийн үзүүлэлт тус бүрийн үр дүнг  дундаж оноо гэсэн ангилалаар үзүүлсэн бөгөөд хүн тус бүрийн дэлгэрэнгүй үр дүнг  хавсралт хэсгээс харж болно.
Хүснэгт 4 Бусадтай харилцахм оюуны чадамжийн дундаж онооны тайлбар 

№	Үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үзүүлэлт	Дундаж онооны тайлбар 
1	Эвлэрүүлэн зуучлах чадвар	5.7	Дундаж	Маргаантай болон зөрчилтэй нөхцөлд эв зүйд хүрэх хандлага дундаж байна. Хоёр талын байр суурийг ойлгож, уялдуулах чадвар дунджаас үл ялиг дээгээүр ч зарим тохиолдолд асуудлыг системтэй дүгнэх логик сэтгэлгээ шаардлагатай байж болох юм.

2	Бусдад урам зориг өгөх чадвар	5.7	Дундаж	Хамтран ажиллагсаддаа эерэг уур амьсгал бүрдүүлж, бусдын оролцоог нэмэгдүүлэхэд чиглэдэг. Энэ нь манлайллын чадамжийн суурь хэлбэр бөгөөд илүү үр дүнтэй нөлөөлөл үзүүлэхийн тулд бусдын хэрэгцээг таних, зорилгоор холбох чадварыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлага ажиглагдаж байна.

3	Ялгаатай байдалд дасан зохицох	5.4	Дундаж	Янз бүрийн үзэл бодол, соёл, зан төлөвтэй хүмүүстэй хамтран ажиллах чадвар дундаж түвшинд бөгөөд  хамтын ажиллагаанд эерэг хандлагатай ч, ялгаатай байдлыг бүрэн хүлээн зөвшөөрөх, олон өнцгөөс хандах сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдлыг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлагатайг илтгэнэ.

4	Ухаалаг эв дүйтэй байх чадвар	5.2	Дундаж	Нөхцөл байдалд тохирсон харилцаа, нөлөөллийн хэлбэрийг сонгох чадвар хөгжиж байгаа. Харилцааны мэдрэмжийг хөгжүүлэх, стратегийн түвшинд бусдад нөлөөлөх ур чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлага бий.

5	Бусдыг ойлгох чадвар	4.7	Дундаж	Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөл, хэрэгцээ, үзэл бодлыг  ойлгох буюу эмпати бага зэрэг сул  байна. Энэ нь багийн уур амьсгал, итгэлцэл, харилцааны гүнзгий холбоонд нөлөөлөх эрсдэлтэй тул бусдын байр суурийг сонсох, хүлээн авах, сэтгэлзүйн ойлголцлыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.

6	Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх чадвар
	5	Дундаж	Өөрийн байр сууриа хамгаалах, хариуцлагатайгаар илэрхийлэхдээ хойрго, энэ нь бусдад хэт зохицох хандлагатай байж болох тул өөрийн итгэл үнэмшил, мэргэжлийн байр сууриа итгэлтэй илэрхийлэх дадлыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.

7	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэх чадвар	6	Дундажаас дээгүүр	Өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөлийг илэрхийлэх, бусдад ойлгуулах чадвар хөгжиж байгаа. Энэ нь ил тод, итгэлцэлд суурилсан харилцааг дэмждэг бөгөөд байгууллагын дотоод соёл, багийн уур амьсгалыг эерэгээр удирдах суурь нөхцөл болдог. Гэвч илэрхийллийн тэнцвэр,  зайлсхийх ур чадварыг хадгалах нь чухал юм
 
БУСАДТАЙ ХАРИЛЦАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖ БҮЛГИЙН ДҮГНЭЛТ, САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ

Бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж бүлгээс хархад сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэх чадвар, эвлэрүүлэн зуучлах чадвар, бусдад урам зориг өгөх чадвар төлөвшиж буйг харуулж байгаа боловч, тодорхой чиглэлд хөгжүүлэх шаардлага харагдаж байна.  Бусдыг ойлгох чадвар, өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх чадвар, ухаалаг эв дүйтэй байх чадварын сул байдал нь ажлын бүтээмжийн тогтвортой. Байдалд нөлөөлж болохуйц талтай юм. 

Тус дүгнэлтээс үүдэн сайжруулах хэд хэдэн зөвлөмжийг хүргэж байна. Үүнд: 

•	Ажилтнуудын бусдын мэдрэмж, хэрэгцээг таних, хүлээн зөвшөөрөх түвшинг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлагатай.Идэвхтэй сонсогчбн хандлагыг хөгжүүлэх сургалт, дасгал хэрэгжүүлэх нь бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг илүү гүнзгий ойлгох, итгэлцлийг бэхжүүлэхэд тустай.
•	Зөрчил, санал зөрөлдөөн үүсэх үед бодит байдлыг дүгнэж, зохистой шийдэл гаргах чадварыг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатайгаас гадна өөрийн үзэл бодлыг тодорхой, нээлттэй илэрхийлэх, бусдын байр суурийг хүндэтгэх тэнцвэрийг хадгалах, төлөвшүүлэх сургалтын арга замыг эрэлхийлэх шаардлагатай. 
•	Янз бүрийн зан төлөв, үзэл бодолтой хүмүүсийн хамтран орших орчныг бий болгохын тулд хүлээцтэй, соёлын мэдрэмжтэй хандлагыг төлөвшүүлэх тус чиглэлд давтамж бүхий сургалтын хөтөлбөрүүдийг хэрэгжүүлэхийг зөвлөж байна. 






3.1 СЭТГЭЛ ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙН БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД

Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамжийн бүлэг үзүүлэлтүүдэд: 
•	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар 
•	Манлайлах чадвар 
•	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх чадвар 
•	Дасан зохицох чадвар 
•	Өөрийгөө ойлгох чадвар 
Хүснэгт 4 Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн бүлэг үзүүлэлт 

№	Үзүүлэлт 	Дундаж оноо
	Дундаж онооны тайлбар 
1	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар 	59.1	Ажилтнууд өөрийн шийдвэр, мэдлэг, туршлагад итгэлтэй ханддаг. Энэ нь гүйцэтгэлд тогтвортой байдал авчирдаг боловч зарим тохиолдолд шинэ санаа, сорилтыг эргэлзэлгүйгээр хүлээн авах уян хатан байдал дутагддаг гэдгийг илтгэж байна . Өөртөө итгэлтэй байдлыг багийн хамтын итгэлцэлтэй тэнцвэржүүлж, бусдаас суралцах хандлагыг хадгалах нь чухал нөлөөтэй юм. 

2	Манлайлах чадвар 	56.8	Манлайлах чадамж дунджаас бага зэрэг дээш түвшинд байна. Энэ нь бусдад нөлөөлөх, урам зориг өгөх, хамтын зорилгод чиглүүлэх чадвар төлөвшиж буйг илэрхийлнэ.  Гэвч стратегийн түвшний манлайлал буюу бусдын оролцоог идэвхжүүлэх, шийдвэр гаргах үйл явцыг удирдан чиглүүлэх ур чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх шаардлагатай. Коучингийн болон нөхцөл байдлын манлайллын сургалт хэрэгжүүлэх нь үр нөлөөтэй байна. 

3	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх чадвар 	60.7	Ажилтнууд тасралтгүй суралцах, өөрийн мэдлэг, ур чадварыг сайжруулахыг эрмэлзлэг. Энэ нь хувь хүний мэргэжлийн өсөлт, байгууллагын дотоод инновацийг дэмжих чухал хүчин зүйл юм. Ажилтнууд өөрчлөлтийг боломж гэж хүлээн авч, шинэ ур чадвар эзэмшихэд нээлттэй ханддаг.  Цаашид өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх төлөвлөгөөг байгууллагын зорилготой уялдуулан системтэй хэрэгжүүлэх нь үр нөлөөг нэмэгдүүлнэ.

4	Дасан зохицох чадвар 	55.1	Шинэ нөхцөл байдал, өөрчлөлтөд уян хатан хандах чадвар дундаж, энэ нь ажлын гэнэтийн өөрчлөлт, шинэчлэлд хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэх хурд, сэтгэлзүйн тэсвэрт байдалд дутагдалтай. Дасан зохицох чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэхийн тулд “өсөн дэвших бодол санааг”-дэмжих, өөрчлөлтөд эерэг хандлага төлөвшүүлэх сургалт, туршлагын солилцоо хэрэгтэй ажиглагдаж байна. 
5	Өөрийгөө ойлгох чадвар 	60.5	Өөрийн зан төлөв, сэтгэл хөдлөл, эерэг  ба сул талыг ухамсарлан ойлгох чадвартай. Энэ нь хувь хүний шийдвэр гаргалт, харилцааны ухаалаг зан төлөв, стрессийн үед тэнцвэрээ хадгалах чадварт эерэг нөлөө үзүүлдэг. Хувь хүн илүү зорилготой, ухамсартай үйлдэлд чиглэсэн, байгууллагын соёлын тэнцвэрт байдлыг хангахад чухал үүрэгтэй.



СЭТГЭЛ ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙН БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮДИЙГ САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

Ажилтнуудын өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх, өөрийгөө ойлгох, өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадварууд схөгжсөн бол дасан зохицох болон манлайлах ур чадвар харьцангуй хөгжлийн шаардлагатай ажиглагдаж байна. 

•	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх, ойлгох чадварыг байгууллагын карьер хөгжлийн бодлоготой уялдуулах замаар хувь хүний хөгжлийн төлөвлөгөөг гаргаж хэрэгжүүлэх.
•	Манлайллын чадварыг хөгжүүлэхийн тулд нөхцөл байдалтай уялдсан хамтын манлайллын сургалыг шат дараалалтай зохион байгуулах 
•	Дасан зохицох чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх зорилгоор өөрчлөлтийн менежмент, сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдлын хөтөлбөр хэрэгжүүлэх.
•	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байдлыг багийн итгэлцэл, хамтын шийдвэр гаргалттай уялдуулж хөгжүүлэх арга замуудыг зөвлөж байна. 




3.2 СЭТГЭЛ ХӨДЛӨЛӨӨ УДИРДАХ ОЮУНЫ ЧАДАМЖИЙН БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН УЯЛДАА ХОЛБОО 


•	Бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж сэтгэл хөдлөл, хэрэгцээ, хандлага, зан төлөвийг ойлгож, хүн хоорондын харилцаанд зөв ашиглах, нийгмийн нөхцөл байдалд бүтээлчээр оролцох оюуны чадамж юм / Howard Gardner (1983, 1993)-ийн Multiple Intelligences Theory/
•	Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж /intrapersonal intelligence / нь хувь хүний өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, сэтгэлгээ, зан төлөв, давуу болон сул тал, үнэт зүйл, зорилгоо ухамсарлаж, энэ мэдлэгийг өөрийгөө удирдах, шийдвэр гаргах, хувь хүний хөгжилд ашиглах оюуны чадамжийг хэлнэ / Howard Gardner (1983, 1993)-ийн Multiple Intelligences Theory/ 

Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж
Бусадтай харилцах  оюуны чадамж 

Дасан зохицох чадвар 	Манлайлах чадвар
Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх чадвар	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх 
Өөрийгөө ойлгох чадвар 	

Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн бүлэг үзүүлэлт сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамжийн ангилал үзүүлэлтийн уялдаа холбоо 


Үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж	Бусадтай харилцах  оюуны чадамж
Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар	59.1	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх нь дан ганц дотооддоо итгэх бус өөрийн үзэл бодлоо бусдад ойлгомжтой,  эерэг баримттайгаар илэрхийлэх харилцааны нэг чадвар бөгөөд бусдын хүлээлтийг ойлгож өөрийн үзэл бодлоо хэтэрхий шулуун бус, эв дүйтэйгээр илэрхийлэхийг зоридог шинжтэй.	Дотоод сэтгэлийн оюуны чадамж нь өөртөө итгэлтэй байдлын суурь үзүүлэлт  юм. Өөртөө итгэлтэй байхын тулд өөрийн үнэ цэнэ self awerness өөрийн байр суурь зорилгоо таньсан / self-confidence/ байх шаардлагатай бөгөөд өөртөө итгэлтэй шийдвэр гаргах, үйлдэл хийхдээ эргэлздэг, бусдын дэмжлэгийг хүсдэг байх талтай.

Манлайлах чадвар	56.8	Манлайлах чадвар өндөртэй, дотоод сэтгэлийн оюуны чадамж өндөртэй манлайлагч нь бусдын хэрэгцээ, сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгож, өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох чадвараараа хамт олны уур амьсгалыг удирдаж, зорилгодоо хүрэх нэгдсэн эрмэлзлийг бүрдүүлдэг.
Бусдыг чиглүүлэх, хамт олныг зохион байгуулах, урам зориг өгөхөд interpersonal чадамжийн хүчин зүйлстэй нягт уялддаг.	Манлайлалын чадвар нь өөраийгөө удирдах чадамж дээр суурилсан нийлмэл чадвар юм. Өөрийн үнэт зүйлдээ үнэнч тогтвортой зорилготой, бусдын нөлөөнд автахгүй шийдвэр нь тогтвортой ч заримдаа манлайлалын үр нөлөө сулрах эрсдэлтэй байдаг.
Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх чадвар	60.7	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх нь дан ганц дотоод сэтгэлийн оюуны чадамж дээр суурилдаг бус, бусдаас суралцах, хамтын ажиллагаанд оролцох янз бүрийн орчноос шинэ туршлага хуримтлуулах замаар ахин дэвждэг, тогтвортой хөгжүүлэх гэж хичээдэг.	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх нь хувь хүний дотоод хөдөлгөгч хүч буюу өөртөө урам зориг өгөх(self-motivation), эерэг хандлага (optimism), сорилтыг даван туулах тогтвортой байдал (resilience), бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан байдал (flexibility) зэрэг intrapersonal хүчин зүйлс дээр үндэслэнэ. Хувь хүн өөрийн хэрэгцээ, зорилго, үнэ цэнийг ухамсарлаж, өөрийн чадамжид өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх гэж хичээдэг.

Дасан зохицох чадвар	55.1	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэхэд түлхэц болж, хүн өөрийн зорилгоо нөхцөл байдлын өөрчлөлтөд нийцүүлэн хэрэгжүүлэх уян хатан стратеги эзэмшсэн байдаг.
Өөрчлөлтөд уян хатан байх нь хувь хүнийг өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, үнэт зүйл, зорилгоо бодит нөхцөл байдалд нийцүүлэн дахин үнэлэх, шинэ стратеги боловсруулах боломж олгодог.	Уян хатан хандлага нь бусдын хүлээлт, зан төлөвт зохицох, багийн уур амьсгал, хамтын ажиллагааг зохицуулахад чухал.
nterpersonal EQ-г дэмжиж, манлайлагчийн хувьд бусдад итгэл төрүүлж, зөрчлийг бүтээлчээр шийдвэрлэх, хамтын ажиллагаанд эерэг орчин бүрдүүлэх хандлагатай.
Өөрийгөө ойлгох чадвар	60.5	Өөрийгөө болон бусдын мэдрэмжийг хүлээж авах үндэс болно. Зарим тохиолдолд өөртаа хэт төвлөрч бусадтай харилцах харилцаагаа орхигдуулах эрсдэлтэй.	Өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, давуу болон сул талыг таньж мэдсэнээр (self-knowledge), өөрийгөө үнэлэх чадвар (self-regard) хийж, өөртөө итгэлтэй болж (self-confidence), сэтгэл хөдлөлөө зохицуулан өөрийгөө үнэлэх чадвар (self-control) зөв үед өөрчлөлт хийх аргаа мэддэг давуу талтай байдаг.





НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАНГИЙН ДҮГНЭЛТ 

    Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамж (EQ) нь хувь хүний дотоод сэтгэлзүй, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө таних, хянах, илэрхийлэх чадвар болон бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгож, уялдуулах, үр дүнтэй харилцах чадамжийн цогц илэрхийлэл юм. 
Тестийн  үр дүнгээс харахад тухайн байгууллагын ажилтнуудын сэтгэлийн хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамжийн ерөнхий оноо нь 110 буюу хэвийн тогтвортой үзүүлэлт илэрсэн. 

     Өөртэйгөө харилцах оюуны чадамж бүлэг үзүүлэлт 6.1, бусадтай харилцах оюуны чадамж 6.2 нь ойролцоо үзүүлэлттэй ажилтанууд өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөлийг тодорхой хэмжээнд ухамсарлан хянах, хүчтэй ба сул талаа таних, бодит үнэлгээ өгөх чадвартай байна. Энэ нь дотоод ухамсар, хариуцлагатай байдал, өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх эрмэлзэлд эерэгээр нөлөөлж буй ч сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдал болон өөртөө урам зориг өгөх чадвар харьцангуй дунд түвшинд байна. Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгох, хамтран ажиллах, зөрчил зохицуулах, эерэг харилцаа бий болгох чадамж дунд түвшинд байна. Ажилтнууд харилцаанд нээлттэй, урам зориг өгөх, эв зүйгээр асуудал шийдвэрлэх хандлагатай боловч эмпати болон харилцааны ухаалаг зохицуулалт сул байна. 

Байгууллагын ажилтнууд сэтгэл хөдлөлийн ухамсар, өөрийгөө танин мэдэх, эерэг хандлага, харилцааны мэдрэмж зэрэг сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюуны чадамжийн суурь чадваруудыг эзэмшсэн.  Гэвч эдгээр чадвар нь стратегийн хэрэглээ (өөрийгөө болон бусдыг сэтгэлзүйн түвшинд урамшуулах, ухаалаг харилцаа удирдах, манлайлах чадамж) чиглэлд бүрэн хангалттай биш. 

Ажилтнуудын сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдал, харилцааны эерэг уур амьсгал, хамтын бүтээмжийг хадгалахад хангалттай суурь болж байгаа хэдий ч сэтгэл хөдлөлийн гүнзгий боловсрол, уян хатан манлайллын соёл хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатайг харуулж байна.

Дээрх дүгнэлтэнд үндэслэн хэд хэдэн зөвлөмжийг хүргэж байна. 

•	Харилцаа, шийдвэр гаргалт, манлайллын бүх түвшинд сэтгэл хөдлөлийн ухамсартай удирдлагыг нэвтрүүлэх.
•	Сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдлын дэмжих, хөтөлбөр сургалтыг тогтмол хэрэгжүүлэх, 
•	Манлайллын чанар, хамтын бүтээмж, ажлын сэтгэл ханамж зэргийг тооцож үзэх гэх мэт. 

СУРГАЛТЫН ХӨТӨЛБӨР 

№	Сургалтын чиглэл 	Сургалтын сэдэв 	Сургалтын зорилго 	Хүлээгдэж буй үр дүн 

1	Өөрийгөө танин мэдэх ба сэтгэл хөдлөлийн ухамсар	-Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө ухамсартай удирдах 

-Өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөлийг таних ба хянах ур чадвар 

	Хувь хүн өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, хүчтэй ба сул талаа ухамсарлан, сэтгэлзүйн тэнцвэрээ хадгалах чадварыг хөгжүүлэх	Ажилтнууд стресстэй нөхцөлд сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдалаа хадгалах ухамсартай шийдвэр гаргах чадвартай болно.
2	Дотоод урам зориг ба өөрийгөө идэвхжүүлэх	-Дотоод сэдлийг таних ба хөгжүүлэх
-Өөрийгөө урамшуулан дэмжих арга зүй
-Хувийн зорилго, үнэ цэнийг байгууллагын зорилготой уялдуулах
	Хувийн зорилго болон байгууллагын үнэт зүйлсийг холбон, дотоодоосоо урам зориг авах хандлагыг төлөвшүүлэх	Ажилтнууд өөрийгөө идэвхжүүлж, тасралтгүй суралцах, өсөх хандлагатай болно.
3	Эмпати ба идэвхтэй сонсох ур чадвар	-Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгох ба илэрхийлэх
-Эмпатийн сэтгэлзүйн үндэс	Бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлийг ойлгох ба илэрхийлэх
- Эмпатийн сэтгэлзүйн үндэс	Багийн уур амьсгал эерэг болж, харилцан итгэлцэл, хамтын оролцоо нэмэгдэнэ.

4	Уян хатан сэтгэлгээ ба өөрчлөлтөд дасан зохицох

	-Хөгжих сэтгэлгээ суулгах,
-Өөрчлөлтөд хандлагыг эерэг болгох арга зам
- Сэтгэлзүйн дархлааг бэхжүүлэх	Өөрчлөлт, шинэ нөхцөлд хурдан дасан зохицох, уян хатан сэтгэлгээг төлөвшүүлэх	Ажилтнууд өөрчлөлтийг боломж гэж хүлээн авч, шинэ санаачилга, инновацид идэвхтэй оролцоно.

5	Эерэг манлайлал ба урам зориг өгөх нөлөөлөл	-Бусдыг урамшуулан дэмжих, нөлөөлөх харилцааны арга барил
- Хамтын манлайллын ур чадвар
	Бусдын урам зоригийг дэмжих, эерэг нөлөө үзүүлэх, хамтын манлайлал төлөвшүүлэх	Манлайлагчид багийн гишүүдийн сэтгэлзүйг зөв чиглүүлж, бүтээмжийг нэмэгдүүлнэ.

АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХЬ ЁС ЗҮЙН ТЕСТИЙН НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАН























ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ЗОРИЛГО
	
	Энэхүү үнэлгээний зорилго нь Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК-ийн ажилтнуудад хувь хүний сөрөг зан төлөв, хандлагыг болон үүнийг тэсэх тэвчээрийг хэмжих замаар ёс зүйн дүн шинжилгээ хийх.  Үнэлгээний үр дүн нь ажилтнуудын ажлын байрны ерөнхий ёс зүйг тодорхойлоход чухал ач холбогдолтой, цаашдын хөгжлийн төлөвлөгөөг боловсруулахад суурь мэдээлэл болно. Түүнчлэн үнэлгээ нь ажилтнуудыг хэт ёс зүйгүй үйлдэл гаргах, байгууллагад учрах хохирлоос урьдчилан сэргийлэх үүрэгтэй.

ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ АРГАЧЛАЛ, АШИГЛАСАН ХЭМЖҮҮР

	 Ашигласан тест: ETIX – Ажлын байран дахь ёс зүйн тест
Үнэлгээний аргачлал:
-	Бусдын зан төлөвт гаргах хандлага: бусдын ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвийг хүлцэх магадлалыг тооцоход ашиглаж болно. Өндөр оноо авсан бол эерэг байна. Тухайн хүчин зүйлийг өндөр түвшинд хүндэлдэг, тиймээс үүнийг үл тоож буй бусад хүнийг зөвтгөхгүй байх хандлагыг илтгэнэ.

-	Хувь хүн өөрт гаргах хандлага: хүний өөрийн зан авирыг хүлцэх, ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргах магадлалыг тооцоход ашиглаж болно. Өндөр оноо авсан бол эерэг байна. Тухайн хүчин зүйлийг өндөр түвшинд хүндэлдэг, тиймээс түүнийг хүндлэх хандлагатайг илтгэнэ.

	 Онооны бүтэц:
	Оноог автоматаар боловсруулж, хувь хүний болон байгууллагын түвшний дундаж, максимум, минимум утгуудыг тодорхойлоно.
	Олон нийтэд таалагдах байдал буюу үнэн зөв хариулсан эсхийг асуулгын аргаар хэмжинэ.
	Оноо 2 түвшинд хуваагдсан: 
1-түвшин:
Олон нийтэд таалагдах байдлыг 5-аас их байвал өөрийн ‘үнэн’ хариултаас илүү нийгэмд хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх, бусдад таалагдах хариултыг сонгосон гэж тооцно.
2-р түвшин: 
	Ёс зүйн оноог тооцох доо 8-аас дээш оноотой бол ажлын байранд сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх байдал бага
	5-7 оноотой байвал дундаж
	4 болон түүнээс бага оноотой бол ажлын байран дээрх сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвт илүү хүлцэнгүй хандах магадлалтай.




ХАМРАГДСАН АЖИЛТНУУДЫН ТОО, БҮТЭЦ

	Нийт оролцсон ажилтны тоо: 31


ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ҮР ДҮНГ БОЛОВСРУУЛАХ ТҮЛХҮҮР ОЙЛГОЛТ
	Энэхүү агуулгыг оруулсан нь байгууллагын үнэт зүйл, зорилго, үйл ажиллагааны чиглэлтэй ёс зүйн тестийн үзүүлэлтүүд уялдаж байгаа эсхийг тодруулах мөн ёс зүйн үнэлгээг байгууллагат илүү оновчтой ашиглах суурь болгон ашигласан болно. 

	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын эрхэм зорилго: Нэгдлийн компаниудаа нэгдсэн бодлого, стратегиар манлайлан удирдаж эрдэс баялгийн үнэ цэнийг нэмэгдүүлж, өнөө болон ирээдүйд үр өгөөж хүртээх тогтолцоог бий болгоно.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын алсын хараа: Монгол Улсын хүнд аж үйлдвэрийн сэргэлтэд манлайлах үүрэг гүйцэтгэж аж үйлдвэрийн гинжин хэлхээг оновчтой бий болгох замаар эрдэс баялгийн үнэ цэнийг нэмэгдүүлнэ.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын үнэт зүйл: Компанийн чадварлаг ажилтан, тэргүүлэх технологи, оновчтой стратеги, манлайлал, тэгш шударга байдлыг үнэт зүйлээ болгон ажиллана.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын үйл ажиллагааны чиглэл: Уул уурхай


1.	ЁС ЗҮЙН ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ШАЛГУУР ОНОО 
Хүснэгт 1. ‘Олон нийтэд таалагдах хандлага’ нь өөрийн ‘үнэн’ хариултаас илүү нийгэмд хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх, бусдад таалагдах хариултыг сонгох байдлыг илэрхийлнэ. Үүнийг өөртөө болон бусдад гэж 2 ангилан харуулсан байгаа. Ёс зүйг тодорхойлох ерөнхий оноо нь ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргах ерөнхий магадлалыг тооцоолох зорилготой.
 
 
ДҮГНЭЛТ: 
Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан 31 ажилтны 74% нь олон нийтэд таалагдах байдлыг илэрхийлэх оноо нь 5-аас хэтэрсэн харагдаж байна /5-аас хэтэрсэн/. Энэ нь 6 бүлгийн өөртөө болон бусдад хэсгүүдэд өөрийн зан төлөвийг мэдүүлэхдээ тааламжтай байдлаар хариулах гэх оролдсоныг илтгэнэ. Ёс зүйн тестийн ерөнхий онооны дундаж нь 7 гарсан ба энэ нь ёс зүйн хандлага хөгжих боломжтой ч дундаж байгааг илэрхийлнэ. 






2.	ЁС ЗҮЙН 6 БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ
	
Тайлбар: 
-	"Хууль, дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх" Бусдад – 5.4, Өөртөө – 6.5.
Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх дээ бусад хүмүүсийг дүрэм журмыг мөрдөж байхад таатай хүлээж авдаг  өөрөө харин дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэж дагаж мөрдөхдөө сайн. 
-	"Бусдыг хүндэтгэх" Бусдад – 3.8, Өөртөө – 4.5.
Өөртөө болон бусдад хандахдаа зүй зохисгүй үйлдэл, үг хэлхийг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх, хэн нэгнийг дорд үзсэн мэт өнгө аясыг үл тоох магадлалтай. Өөрөө зохисгүй үйлдэл хийх магадлал өндөр мөн бусдыг хүндлэхгүй байгаа үйлдэлийг хэвийн гэж үздэг.  
-	"Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх" Бусдад – 4.3, Өөртөө 3.2.
Тэгш байдал, шударга байдлыг үл тоох, бусдын ялгаатай байдлыг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх зэрэгт хүндрэлтэй мөн ялгаварлан гадуурхах, гадна үзэмжээр хүнтэй харицах магадлалтай. Иймд хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай. 
-	"Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах" Бусдад – 4.9, Өөртөө – 4.2.
Удирдлагууд өөртөө үүрэг хариуцлагынхаа талаар бага ухамсарлаж байгаа нь байгууллага доторх хариуцлага, гүйцэтгэлийн үр дүнд нөлөөлнө. Мөн өөрийн хийсэн үйлдэлд хариуцлага хүлээх байдал сул.
-	"Эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх" Бусдад – 6.4, Өөртөө – 6.5.
Байгууллагын бараа, эд хөрөнгийг хүндэтгэдэг хүмүүст эерэг хандлага үзүүлдэг. Мөн өөрөө ч эд хөрөнгө өмчийг хүндэтгэн ханддаг. 
-	"Баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шудрага байдлыг хүндэтгэх" Бусдад – 5.2, Өөртөө – 5.1.
Ажил дээрээ үнэнч, шударга байдлыг эрхэмлэдэг хүмүүст эерэг ханддаг, өөрөө үнэнч шудрага байдлыг дэмждэг. 


3. ЁС ЗҮЙН ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ 6 ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН ТАЙЛБАР
 
ДҮРЭМ ЖУРМЫГ ХҮНДЭТГЭХ
	
	Энэхүү хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүний хууль, байгууллагын дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг харуулна. Тухайн хүний авлига, хээл хахуулийн үйлдлийг хүлээн авах хандлагыг хэмжих зорилготой юм. / Central test manual /

Хүснэгт 2. Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн дундаж оноо болон тайлбар

Хандлагын үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	Дундаж онооны тайлбар
Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	5.4	Дундаж	 Дүрэм журмыг дагаж мөрдөхдөө сайн гэхдээ хувийн ашиг сонирхолын зөрчил үүсвэл өөрийгөө зөвтгөх хандлагатай. Тиймээс зарим үед байгууллагын ашиг сонирхлыг үл тоож өөрийн зорилгодоо хүрэхийн тулд дүрмийг зөрчиж болзошгүй. 
Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад	6.5	Дундаж	Бусдыг дүрэм журмыг дагаж мөрдөх ёстой гэж үздэг бөгөөд хүмүүс дүрэм зөрчих, гуйвуулахыг ихэнх тохиолдолд хүлээн зөвшөөрдөггүй. Тийм ч учраас өөрийн олж мэдсэн ямар нэг авилгын үйлдлийг буруушааж, мэдээлэх магадлалтай.   
 

Хүснэгт 3.  Нийт ажилтнуудын дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал

Онооны ангилал	Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн % /Өөртөө/ 	Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн % /Бусдад/
8-аас их оноотой – ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг	6%	0%
5-7 оноотой - Дундаж	77%	90%
1-4 оноотой – Ёс зүйгүй байдалд хүлцэнгүй ханддаг	16%	10%

Зөвлөмж:
	Дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлт дундаж буюу 5.4 болон 6.5 оноотой байгаа нь дүрэм журмыг дагаж мөрдөхдөө сайн. Хууль, дүрэм журмыг чанд дагаж мөрддөг бөгөөд бусдад ч мөн адил өндөр шаардлага тавьдаг. Өөртөө болон бусдад тавьдаг өндөр шаардлагаа хадгалан авч үлдэх, бусдад сайн үлгэр дуурайлал болж, бусдын зан төлөвт хатуу шаардлага тавьсаар байх хэрэгтэй. 





















БУСДЫГ ХҮНДЭТГЭХ

	Энэхүү хүчин зүйл нь ажлын байран дахь бусдад хандах хүндэтгэлийг харуулна. Ёс зүйгүй доромжилсон зан үйлдлийг хүлээн авах түвшинг хэмжих зорилготой бөгөөд дээрэлхэх, дарамтлахыг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх, үйлдэх магадлалыг харуулдаг. / Central test manual /

Хүснэгт 4. Бусдыг  хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн дундаж оноо болон тайлбар

Хандлагын үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	Дундаж онооны тайлбар

Бусдыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад	3.8	Сул	 Ажлын байран дахь бусдын зүй зохисгүй үйлдлийг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх хандлагатай. Хэн нэгнийг доромжилсон хошигносон үйлдэл, эвгүй байдалд оруулсан онигоо гэх мэтийг үйлдэлийг хэвийн хүлээж авдаг. Цаашлаад нэгнээ хүндэтгэхгүй байдлыг өөгшүүлэх магадлалтай. 


Бусдыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	4.5	Сул	Бусдыг эвгүй байдалд оруулах үг үйлдэл гаргаж болзошгүй. Хэн нэгнийг алдааг засаж байна гэсэн үгээр олны өмнө эвгүй байдалд оруулах гэх мэт ёс зүйгүй үйлдэлийг өөрөө гаргах магадлалтай. 
 
Хүснэгт 5.  Нийт ажилтнуудын бусдыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал	Бусдыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад 	Бусдыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө
8-аас их оноотой – ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг	0%	0%
5-7 оноотой - Дундаж	55%	61%
1-4 оноотой – Ёс зүйгүй байдалд хүлцэнгүй ханддаг	45%	39%


Зөвлөмж:
	Бусдыг хүндэтгэх бүлгийн өөртөө хэсэгт 4.5, бусдад хэсэгт 3.8 оноо буюу сул байгаа нь харилцааны манлайлал, багийн уур амьсгалд сөргөөр нөлөөлөх эрсдэлтэй байна. Удирдагчид нь хамт олныхоо хандлага, зан үйлийн жишгийг тодорхойлдог тул хүндлэл, итгэлцэлд суурилсан манлайллын хэв маяг төлөвшүүлэх шаардлагатай. Иймд удирдах ажилтнуудад зориулсан “харилцааны манлайлал”, “coaching leadership”, “emotional intelligence” чиглэлийн сургалт, коучинг хэрэгжүүлж, байгууллагын соёлыг үлгэрлэн удирдах чадварыг хөгжүүлэх нь зүйтэй. 



ЭРХ ТЭГШ БАЙДЛЫГ ХҮНДЭТГЭХ
Энэхүү хүчин зүйл нь эрх тэгш байдлын хандлагыг илтгэнэ. Ажлын байран дахь  ялгаварлан гадуурхах үйлдлийг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх түвшин, магадлалыг хэмжих зорилготой юм. / Central test manual /
Хүснэгт 6. Эрх тэгш байдлыг  хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн дундаж оноо болон тайлбар
Хандлагын үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	              Дундаж онооны тайлбар

Эрх тэгш байдал : Бусдад	4.3	Сул	Өөрийн урьдчилан харсан дүгнэлтээр стереотип хандлага гаргаж, ялгаварлан гадуурхах үйлдлийг зөвтгөх магадлалтай. Тухайлбал, шинэ ажилтан авах үедээ ажил горилогчийн гадаад төрх, үндэс угсаанд нь анхаарч үйлдэл гаргах магадлалтай. Ингэснээр сөрөг ажлын орчинг хүлээн зөвшөөрхөд хувь нэмрээ оруулах магадлалтай байна.

Эрх тэгш байдал: Өөртөө	3.2	Дундаж	 Зарим үед ажлын гүйцэтгэлтэй холбоотой хүчин зүйлүүд дээр нь биш гадаад төрх, нас, хүйсэн дээр нь анхаарч үйлдэл гаргах гэх мэт өөрийн урьдчилан харсан дүгнэлтээр стереотип хандлага гаргах магадлалтай.   
 
Хүснэгт 7.  Нийт ажилтнуудын эрх тэгш байдлыг  хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад
8-аас их оноотой – ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг	0%	0%
5-7 оноотой - Дундаж	35%	65%
1-4 оноотой – Ёс зүйгүй байдалд хүлцэнгүй ханддаг	65%	35%

Зөвлөмж:
Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх бүлгийн бусдад хэсэгт 4.3, өөртөө хэсэгт 3.2 оноо авсан, энэ нь ялгаварлан гадуурхах, бусдыг шүүх хандлага гаргаж болзошгүй гэдгийг харуулж байна. Иймд байгууллагын удирдлага ажлын байран дахь стереотип хандлагыг бууруулах, ялгаварлан гадуурхахгүй байх талаарх мэдлэг олгох сургалт, нээлттэй, эерэг харилцааг дэмжих соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх үйл ажиллагааг тогтмол хэрэгжүүлэх нь зүйтэй. Мөн ажилтнуудын санал хүсэлтийг тогтмол сонсож, эрх тэгш орчныг бодитоор сайжруулах арга хэмжээ авахыг зөвлөж байна.









ҮҮРЭГ ХАРИУЦЛАГАА УХАМСАРЛАХ
Энэхүү хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүний үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах хандлагыг хэмждэг. Энэ нь ажилдаа тууштай хандах чадварыг үнэлэх зорилготой юм. . /Central test manual/
Хүснэгт 8. Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах үзүүлэлтийн дундаж оноо болон тайлбар
Хандлагын үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	Дундаж онооны тайлбар

Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах: Бусдад  	4.9	Дундаж	       Бусдын үүрэг хариуцлагаа биелүүлэхгүй байдлыг цалин бага, үнэлэмж бага учраас ойлгож болохуйц зүйл гэж зөвтгөж үзэх хандлагатай. Хамтран ажиллагсад нь хоцрох эсвэл чанарт анхаарахгүй байх гэх мэт найдвартай бус үйлдэл хийхэд нэг их тоодоггүй бөгөөд тийм ч учраас ийм үйлдлийг хүлээн зөвшөөрч, мэдээлэхгүй байх магадлалтай.  
Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах: Өөртөө	4.2	Сул	   Өөрийн үүрэг хариуцлагыг биелүүлэх тал дээр сайн ч зарим үед хяналтан дор биш байвал бага ажиллах, хоцрох зэрэгт зөвтгөн үзэх хандлагатай.
 
Хүснэгт 9.  Нийт ажилтнуудын үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад
8-аас их оноотой – ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг	0%	0%
5-7 оноотой - Дундаж	77%	55%
1-4 оноотой – Ёс зүйгүй байдалд хүлцэнгүй ханддаг	23%	45%

Зөвлөмж:
	Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах бүлэгт өөртөө болон бусдад хэсэгт 4.9 болон 4.2  оноо авсан байгаа нь ёс зүйн үзүүлэлт сул. Үүрэг хариуцлагаа биелүүлэх тал дээр бусдад мөн ойролцоо түвшиний шаардлага тавьдаг нь үр бүтээмжгүй ажлын орчныг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх, хувь нэмрээ оруулах магадлалтай болгож байна. Иймээс удирлагагын зүгээс үүрэг хариуцлага тооцдог, өөрөө түүнийг ухамсраж хэрэгжүүлдэг, үлгэрлэн үзүүлдэг байх шаардлагатай. 


ЭД ХӨРӨНГӨ, ӨМЧИЙГ ХҮНДЭТГЭХ
Энэхүү хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүний эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг хэмждэг. Энэ нь өмч хөрөнгийг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх чадварыг харуулахаас гадна жижиг гэлтгүй зүйлсийг зөвшөөрөлгүй авч болох магадлалыг хэмждэг.  /Central test manual/

Эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх: Бусад	6.4	Дундаж	Байгууллагын бараа, эд хөрөнгийн хүндэтгэдэг хүмүүст эерэг хандлага үзүүлдэг. Ажлын газрынхаа нөөц, мөнгө, бараанаас хулгайлах нь хүлээн зөвшөөрч боломгүй зүйл гэж үздэг. Ямар нэгэн хулгайн үйлдэлтэй тулгарвал өөрт нь тааламжгүй санагдаж, мэдээлэх магадлалтай бөгөөд хулгай хийсэн хүнийг шударгаар шийтгэлээ хүртэх ёстой гэж үздэг.    
Эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	6.5	Дундаж	Байгууллагын бараа, эд хөрөнгийг хүндэтгэх тал дээр эерэг хандлагатай. Ажилтнууд нь байгууллагын бараа, эд хөрөнгөнд хүндэтгэлтэй хандах нь компанийн амжилтанд чухал гэж үздэг учраас ямар нэг хулгайн үйлдэлд оролцох магадлал бага.   
 
Хүснэгт 11.  Нийт ажилтнуудын эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад
8-аас их оноотой – ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг	13%	0%
5-7 оноотой - Дундаж	84%	97%
1-4 оноотой – Ёс зүйгүй байдалд хүлцэнгүй ханддаг	3%	3%

Зөвлөмж:
		Эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх бүлэгт өөртөө болон бусдад хэсэгт 6.4 болон 6.5 оноо авсан байна. Энэ нь дундаж буюу хэвийн үзүүлэлттэй гарсан байна. Энэ байдал нь компанид болон ажилтнуудад ашигтай ба цаашлаад эдгээр үзүүлэлтийг илүү өсгөх тал дээр анхаарах хэрэгтэй. 


БАРИМ НОТОЛГОО, ҮНЭНЧ ШУДАРГА БАЙДЛЫГ ХҮНДЭТГЭХ
Энэхүү хүчин зүйл нь баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдалд хандах хандлагыг үнэлнэ. Хувь хүний ташаа мэдээлэл, хууран мэхлэх үйлдлийг хүлээн авах чадварыг хэмжих зорилготой юм. /Central test manual
Хүснэгт 12. Баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн дундаж оноо болон тайлбар
Хандлагын үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	Дундаж онооны тайлбар
Баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад	5.2	Дундаж	Ажил дээрээ үнэнч, шударга байдлыг эрхэмлэдэг хүмүүст эерэг ханддаг. Мэдээллийг гуйвуулах, худал ярих үйлдлүүдийг хүлээн зөвшөөрдөггүй ч зөвтгөн үзэх шалтгаан гарч ирвэл  хуурмаг үйлдлийг хүлцдэггүй хандах магадлалтай. 
Баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	5.1	Дундаж	Ажилтнууд нь үнэнч, шударга байдлыг эрхэмлэх тал дээр эерэг хандлагатай ч хувийн шалтгааны улмаар зарим тохиолдолд худал мэдээлэл өгөх, эсвэл нуух магадлалтай
 



Хүснэгт 13.  Нийт ажилтнуудын Баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Өөртөө	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх: Бусдад
8-аас их оноотой – ёс зүйг эрхэмлэдэг	0	3%
5-7 оноотой - Дундаж	74%	71%
1-4 оноотой – Ёс зүйгүй байдалд хүлцэнгүй ханддаг	26%	26%

ДҮГНЭЛТ:
Барим нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх бүлэгт 5.1 болон 5.2 оноо авсан байна. Энэ нь ёс зүйн хувьд дундаж буюу хэвийн гарсан байна. Гэсэн хэдий ч зарим тохиолдолд өөрийн болон бусдын ашгийн төлөө байгууллагын үнэнч, шудрага байдлыг алдагдуулаж болзошгүй. Иймээс уг үзүүлэлтийг өсгөх шаардлагатай. 


НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАНГИЙН ДҮГНЭЛТ

Уг үнэлгээнд “Эрдэнэс Монгол” ХХК-ийн 31 удирдах шатны ажилтнууд хамрагдсан бөгөөд үнэлгээний үр дүнгийн хүрээнд доорх дүгнэлтүүдийг хүргэж байна. 
Энэ нь байгууллагын удирдлагуудын дийлэнх нь ёс зүйг хүндэтгэх хандлагатай боловч тодорхой чиглэлүүдэд (жишээлбэл, бусдыг хүндэтгэх, эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх, үүрэг хариуцлага ухамсарлах) хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай сул талууд байгааг илтгэнэ.  Ийнхүү үнэлгээний үр дүн нь байгууллагын “тэгш шударга байдал, манлайлал, оновчтой стратеги, чадварлаг ажилтан” зэрэг үнэт зүйлтэй шууд уялдаж байгаа бөгөөд ёс зүйн хандлага нь байгууллагын соёл, гүйцэтгэл, манлайллын чанарт шууд нөлөөлөх гол хүчин зүйл болохыг нотолж байна.

БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ҮЙЛ АЖИЛЛАГАА, АЛСЫН ХАРАА, ЗОРИЛГОТОЙ НИЙЦЭХ ЁС ЗҮЙН  ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН ТАЙЛБАР:      
Ёс зүйн шалгуур	Үнэлгээний түвшин	Дүгнэлт, тайлбар
Хууль, дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх	5.4 / 6.5 – Дундаж	“Тэгш шударга байдал”, “манлайлал”-тай уялдана. Удирдлагууд дүрэм журмыг дагаж мөрдөхдөө сайн боловч хувийн ашиг сонирхол үүсвэл өөрийгөө зөвтгөх хандлага ажиглагдана.
Бусдыг хүндэтгэх	3.8 / 4.5 – Сул	“Чадварлаг ажилтан”, “манлайлал”Харилцааны ёс зүй, багийн уур амьсгал, итгэлцэл сул. Удирдлагуудын харилцааны манлайлалд анхаарах шаардлагатай.
Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх	4.3 / 3.2 – Сул	“Тэгш шударга байдал”, “эрдэс баялгийн үнэ цэнийг шударгаар хуваарилах” Ялгаварлан гадуурхах, стереотип хандлага илэрч болзошгүй. Эерэг, нээлттэй орчны соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх шаардлагатай.
Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах	4.9 / 4.2 – Сул	“Оновчтой стратеги”, “манлайлал” Ажилдаа тууштай, хариуцлагатай байдал дунд түвшинд. Гүйцэтгэл, хариуцлагын соёлыг сайжруулах хэрэгтэй.
Эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх	6.4 / 6.5 – Дундаж	“Тэгш шударга байдал”, “ёс зүйтэй удирдлага” Эерэг хандлагатай, байгууллагын өмчийг хүндэтгэдэг. Энэхүү хандлагыг хадгалах, үлгэрлэх нь зүйтэй.
Баримт нотолгоо, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх	5.1 / 5.2 – Дундаж	“Тэгш шударга байдал”, “манлайлал” Үнэнч байдлыг эрхэмлэдэг ч зарим нөхцөлд ашиг сонирхлын зөрчил үүсэх эрсдэлтэй.

Ёс зүйн үнэлгээний 6 үндсэн хүчин зүйлийн оноогоос хархад Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК ажилтнуудын анхаарч хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай сул талыг жагсаасан. Үүнд:
1.	Харилцааны ёс зүй ба бусдыг хүндэтгэх хандлага сул.
•	Харилцааны ёс зүй, багийн уур амьсгал, итгэлцэл сул тул харилцааны манлайлал, сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюун ухааныг хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.
2.	Эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх байдал сул
•	Ялгаварлан гадуурхах, стереотип хандлага илэрч болзошгүй тул хүртээмжтэй, тэгш орчны соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх хэрэгтэй.
3.	Үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах
•	Гүйцэтгэл, хариуцлагын соёл дутмаг байгаа тул хариуцлагын системийг сайжруулах шаардлагатай.
4.	Үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх 
•	Ил тод байдал, ёс зүйн шийдвэр гаргах чадварыг бэхжүүлэх сургалт, арга хэмжээг хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай.

ХӨГЖҮҮЛЭХ ШААРДЛАГАТАЙ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙГ САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ: 
1.	Харилцааны ёс зүйг сайжруулах:
•	Удирдлагуудад “Emotional Intelligence”, “Coaching Leadership” сургалт хэрэгжүүлж, харилцааны манлайлал, хүндлэл, итгэлцэлд суурилсан орчныг төлөвшүүлэх.
•	Хамт олны дунд харилцан ойлголцол, эерэг харилцааг дэмжих бодлогын арга хэмжээ хэрэгжүүлэх.
2.	Эрх тэгш байдлыг дэмжих:
•	“Diversity & Inclusion” сургалт, хэлэлцүүлэг зохион байгуулж, ялгаварлан гадуурхах хандлагыг бууруулах.
•	Ажлын байранд “Тэг тэвчээрийн бодлого” нэвтрүүлж, тэгш орчны соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх.
3.	 Үүрэг хариуцлагын соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх:
•	“Accountability” буюу хариуцлагын тогтолцоог сайжруулж, гүйцэтгэлийн үнэлгээнд ёс зүйн үзүүлэлт тусгах.
•	Удирдлагуудын өөрийн болон бусдын хариуцлагыг ухамсарлах чадварыг нэмэгдүүлэх коучинг, сургалт хэрэгжүүлэх.
4.	Ёс зүйн бодит хандлагыг төлөвшүүлэх:
•	Ёс зүйн шийдвэр гаргах чадвар, үнэнч шударга байдлын талаарх сургалт, кейс хэлэлцүүлэг зохион байгуулах.
•	Удирдлагуудыг өөрийн үнэт зүйл, бодит хандлагаараа үлгэрлэхийг дэмжиж, ил тод байдлын соёлыг тогтмол урамшуулах.

Санал болгож буй сургалтын хөтөлбөр:
№	Сургалтын нэр	Зорилго	Хүлээгдэж буй үр дүн	Хэрэгжүүлэх хэлбэр
1	Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн оюун ухаан	Удирдлагуудын сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах, бусдын мэдрэмжийг ойлгох, эерэг харилцааг төлөвшүүлэх чадварыг хөгжүүлэх	Харилцааны ёс зүй, багийн уур амьсгал сайжирч, итгэлцэл, хүндлэл нэмэгдэнэ	Сургалт + Бүлгийн дасгал + Коучинг
2	Хөгжүүлэн манлайлах ур чадвар	Удирдлагуудыг бусдыг дэмжин хөгжүүлэх, сонсох, чиглүүлэх манлайллын арга барилд сургах	Бусдын оролцоог нэмэгдүүлж, идэвх, хариуцлагыг дэмжсэн манлайллын соёл төлөвшинө	Сургалт + Зөвлөх коучинг
3	Эрх тэгш, хүртээмжтэй орчин	Ялгаварлан гадуурхалтыг бууруулах, нээлттэй, хүртээмжтэй ажлын орчны ойлголт төлөвшүүлэх	Эрх тэгш байдлыг дэмжих хандлага нэмэгдэж, байгууллагын соёл илүү хүртээмжтэй болно	Сургалт + Хэлэлцүүлэг + Кейс судалгаа
4	Хариуцлагын соёл ба гүйцэтгэл	Ажилдаа хариуцлагатай хандах, гүйцэтгэлийг хянах, үүргээ ухамсарлах соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх	Хариуцлагын түвшин дээшилж, гүйцэтгэлийн ил тод байдал сайжирна	Сургалт + Гүйцэтгэлийн семинар
5	Ёс зүйтэй манлайлал	Ёс зүйн шийдвэр гаргах чадвар, үнэнч шударга байдлыг төлөвшүүлэх	Удирдлагууд байгууллагын үнэт зүйл, ёс зүйг бодитоор хэрэгжүүлэгч үлгэрлэл болно	Сургалт + Кейс хэлэлцүүлэг + Форум
6	Ил тод байдал ба шударга ёс	Ёс зүйн код, ил тод байдлыг хэрэгжүүлэх дадал төлөвшүүлэх	Ашиг сонирхлын зөрчил буурч, байгууллагын нэр хүнд, итгэлцэл нэмэгдэнэ	Сургалт + Хамтын хэлэлцүүлэг
7	Багийн харилцаа ба хамтын ажиллагаа	Багийн харилцааг сайжруулах, хамтын ажиллагаанд тулгуурласан соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх	Багийн уур амьсгал эерэг болж, үр дүнтэй хамтын ажиллагаа төлөвшинө	Сургалт + Багийн дасгал + Workshop

ЦААШИД АВАХ НЭМЭЛТ АРГА ХЭМЖЭЭ:
1.	Ёс зүйн код, дүрмийг шинэчлэх, бүх шатны ажилтанд ойлгомжтой, хэрэгжихүйц байдлаар танилцуулах.
2.	Ёс зүйн соёлыг байгууллагын гүйцэтгэлийн үнэлгээтэй уялдуулах, хариуцлагын тогтолцоог сайжруулах.
3.	Удирдах ажилтнуудын ёс зүйн жишиг, үлгэрлэл болох хандлагыг бэхжүүлэх зорилгоор “Ёс зүйтэй манлайлал” тогтмол зохион байгуулах.
4.	Ёс зүйн үнэлгээг жил бүрийн хүний нөөцийн хөгжлийн хөтөлбөрт багтаах.
5.	Дотоод коучинг ба зөвлөх үйлчилгээний систем нэвтрүүлэх — хувь хүний хандлагын хөгжлийг дэмжих зорилгоор.


ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ ҮР ДҮНГИЙН АШИГЛАЛТ

	ETIX тестийн гол зорилго нь ажлын байрны ёс зүйгүй үйлдэл, үүнд хандах хандлага,тэсвэр тэвчээр болон үйлдэх магадлалыг хэмжихэд оршино. Энэхүү үнэлгээ нь хүний нөөцийн ажилтнуудад зориулагдсан ба байгууллагын хөгжил болон ажлын байраны сонгон шалгаруулалт хийхэд тохиромжтой.
	ETIX тест нь хувь хүн, баг, байгууллагын үнэлгээнд тохиромжтой тул олон төрлөөр буюу ажилчдыг сонгон шалгаруулж авах, байгууллагын соёлыг хөгжүүлэх болон аудитын хэрэглээнд зэргээр ашиглаж болно.
	Байгууллагын хөгжил нь удирдлага болоод ажилтнуудын хөгжилтэй шууд хамааралтай байдаг тул Хүний нөөцийн бодлогын хүрээнд ажилтнуудаа бүх талаар нь таньж мэдэн, түүн дээр тулгуурлан хөгжүүлэлтээ хийх нь нэн тэргүүний асуудал болоод байна. Хүний нөөцийн ур чадварын үнэлгээг ашигласнаар байгууллага Хүний нөөцийн бүх чиг үүргүүдийнхээ хэрэгжүүлэлт, хөгжүүлэлтэнд суурь мэдээлэл болгон ашиглаж, цаашлаад бодлого, стратегиа оновчтой тодорхойлон, түүнийг зөв удирдан жолоодох боломжтой юм.
Хүний нөөцийн үнэлгээний төвийн үнэлгээнүүд нь олон жилийн судалгаан дээр тулгуурласан, Олон улсын тестийн хороо /ITC/, Америкийн Нэгдсэн Улсын сэтгэл судлалын холбоо /APA/, Английн сэтгэл судлалын нийгэмлэг /BPS/ -ээр тус тус баталгаажсан байдаг. Тиймээс та бүхэн үнэлгээний үр дүнд итгэлтэй байж дээрх чиглэлүүдээр ашиглах боломжтой.
Олон улсын чанарын стандартаар баталгаажсан хүний нөөцийн ур чадварыг тодорхойлох сэтгэл зүйн үнэлгээнд байгууллагын ажилтнуудаа хамруулж, удирдах ажилтнууд өөрийгөө таних, хандлага ур чадвараа шинжлэх ухааны үндэслэлтэй тодорхойлж өөрийн давуу болон сул талуудаа дүгнэн хөгжүүлэх тал дээр хувь хүнд зориулсан ганцаарчилсан зөвлөгөөнд хамрагдах боломжийг олгосон танай байгууллага болоод удирдлагууд, хүний нөөцийн баг хамт олонд баяр хүргэж, талархал илэрхийлье.
Бидний үзүүлсэн үйлчилгээ нь та бүхнийг Олон Улсын төвшинд өрсөлдөхүйц хэмжээний ажиллах хүчийг бэлдэж, хөгжүүлэхэд чиглэл болж, түлхэц үзүүлэхийн сацуу байгууллагын өрсөлдөх чадварыг нэмэгдүүлж, бусдаас түрүүлж алхах боломжийг олгож чадна гэдэгт бүрэн итгэлтэй байна.
Та бүхэнтэй хамтран ажиллахад таатай байлаа, бидний дараа дараагийн хамтын ажиллагаа улам өргөжин урт хугацаанд амжилттай үргэлжилнэ гэдэгт итгэлтэй байна.

ТАЙЛАН
Менежерийн ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ





 

















АГУУЛГА
1.	ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД
2.	ГРАФИК ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД
3.	ХУВЬ ХҮНИЙ ОНЦЛОГТ ХАМААРАХ ДҮН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ
4.	ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ХҮСНЭГТ
5.	ТАЙЛБАР
6.	МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН УР ЧАДВАРЫН ЕРӨНХИЙ ҮНЭЛГЭЭ
7.	АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХЬ ӨРСӨЛДӨХ УР ЧАДВАРУУД


















1 - ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД
Үнэлгээний хүчин төгөлдөр байдал
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ оноо нь оролцогчийн өөрийгөө бодит бусаар сайнаар харуулах, бусдад таалагдах байдлаар хариулт өгөх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ.

Энэ хүчин зүйл дээрх 5-аас дээш оноо нь оролцогчийн зүгээс (ухамсартайгаар болон далд ухамсраар) хуурах магадлал өндөр байж болох учраас гарсан үр дүнг болгоомжтой тайлбарлах ёстой гэдгийг харуулж байна.
Менежерийн чадавх
Тодорхойлолт
Менежерийн чадавх нь оролцогчийн менежерийн ур чадварын талаарх ойлголтыг өгнө.
Оноо нь 0 (менежерийн маш бага ур чадвар)-с 100 (менежерийн маш өндөр ур чадвар)–н хооронд хэлбэлзэнэ.
Өндөр оноо нь тухайн оролцогчийг баг хамт олныг удирдах, үүрэг хариуцлага хүлээх, зохих шийдвэрүүдийг гаргах чадвар бүхий чадварлаг менежер гэдгийг илэрхийлнэ.
Энэ шалгуур үзүүлэлтийг хувь хүний менежментийн туршлагын түвшинд хамаарах хамгийн чухал ялгаануудыг харуулах асуултуудад өгсөн хариултуудаас гаргаж авсан болно.
2 - ГРАФИК ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД


 




Шинийг туршдаг (9.2)
Дасан зохицох
чадвар (8.1)
Үйлдэлд чиглэсэн (8.9)
Зорилгодоо хүрэх чин
хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй
(8.9)
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг (9.2)
Зөн совин,
алсын хараатай
(6.4)
Эелдэг
нээлттэй (7.2)	Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай (5.6)
Хяналт тавьдаг (5.8)
Бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг (6.9)
Тактикч (5.8)
Итгэл хүлээлгэдэг (9.2)
Хууль, дүрэм журмыг
сахидаг (2.2)
Өөртөө итгэлтэй (8.9)
Зохион байгуулалттай, тууштай (3.9)
Өөдрөг үзэлтэй (8.9)
 



Идэвхтэй
(7.5
Ажлын төлөө (8.1)
Баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурладаг (5.3)
БУСДЫГ УДИРДАХ	АЖЛЫН АРГА БАРИЛ	ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ УДИРДАХ	ӨӨРЧЛӨЛТИЙГ УДИРДАХ
Таны зан чанарын онцлог шинжүүдийн тухай энд тодорхойлох болно.

Үр дүнг тайлбарлах явцад анхаарах зүйлс:
-	Зарим хувь хүнд хамаарах онцлог шинжүүд өөр хоорондоо зөрчилдөж болно. Энэ нь хүний зан чанарт тохиолддог үнэн бодит байдал юм.
-	Та энэхүү тайлангийн “Тайлбар” хэсгээс тухайн хувь хүнд хамаарах онцлог шинжүүдийн дэлгэрэнгүй тодорхойлолтыг харж болно.
Тухайн хувь хүнд хамаарах онцлог шинж чанарууд
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг
Шинийг туршдаг
Итгэл хүлээлгэдэг
Үйлдэлд чиглэсэн
Зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй
Дараах хүснэгтэд оролцогчийн өгсөн хариултын үр дүнг нэгтгэн дүгнэсэн болно. "✔"тэмдэг нь оролцогчийн тухайн үзүүлэлтэд хамаарах байдлыг илэрхийлнэ.
Эсрэг хүчин зүйл	A  B  C	D	E  F  G	H	I	J	K	Үндсэн хүчин зүйл
БУСДЫГ УДИРДАХ
Эелдэг нээлттэй (-)
Зай барьдаг, ганцаараа байдаг
Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай (-)
Хүний үгээр, эвлэрэнгүй, нөлөөлөхөд амархан

Хяналт тавьдаг (-)
Хүлцэнгүй, хөндлөнгөөс оролцдоггүй, түрэмгий бус
Бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг (-)
Бие даасан байдал, өөрөө суралцах байдалд дуртай
Тактикч (-)
Зөнгөөрөө, үнэн сэтгэлээсээ, цайлган шударга
Сонор сэрэмжтэй (-)
Сонор, үл итгэгч, сэжигч
Хууль, дүрэм журмыг сахидаг (-)
Хүлцэнгүй, хүлээцтэй, аядуу зөөлөн
Зохион байгуулалттай, тууштай (-) Анхаарал амархан сарнидаг, замбараагүй, бүтээлч байхыг зорьдог
Мэдрэмжтэй (-)
Мэдрэмжтэй, өөрийн мэдрэмжид анхаарал тавьдаг
Ажлын төлөө (-)
Хувийн амьдрал, ажил төрлөө ялгаж салгадаг
Идэвхтэй (-)
Хашир, тайван, өөрийгөө эзэмдэж чаддаг
Өөдрөг үзэлтэй (-)
Гутранги үзэлтэй, бодитой ханддаг, амархан урам хугардаг
Өөртөө итгэлтэй (-)
Өөртөө итгэдэггүй, өөртөө эргэлздэг
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг (-)
Сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй, түргэн зантай, хүсэл тэмүүлэлтэй
Зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй (-)
Одоогийн нөхцөл байдалдаа сэтгэл ханадаг



Үйлдэлд чиглэсэн (-) Өөрчлөлтөд бодолтой ханддаг Дасан зохицох чадвар (-)
Уян хатан биш, өөрчлөлтийг эсэргүүцдэг
Шинийг туршдаг (-)
Уламжлалт, тогтсон арга барилыг дагадаг
Зөн совин, алсын хараатай (-)
Баримтад тулгуурладаг, прагматик, өнөөдөртөө анхаардаг

АЖЛЫН АРГА БАРИЛ
ӨӨРИЙГӨӨ УДИРДАХ
ӨӨРЧЛӨЛТИЙГ УДИРДАХ 
Эелдэг нээлттэй
Дулаахан,нөхөрсөг, тааламжтай
Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай
Тууштай, эрс шийдэмгий, өөртө
итгэлтэй
Хяналт тавьда
Түрэмгий, хянах дуртай, эрх мэдэлтэй
Бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг
Дэмжлэг, урам зориг, туслалцаа үзүүлдэ
Тактикч
Стратегич, тактикч, тооцоотой
Итгэл хүлээлгэдэ
Бусдад амархан итгэдэг

Хууль, дүрэм журмыг сахида
Үнэт зүйл, хууль, дүрэм журмыг
хүндэтгэдэг Зохион байгуулалттай, тууштай Чамбай, нягт нямбай, мэрийлттэй
Баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурлада
Бодитой, бодит баримтад үндэслэдэг
ухаалаг
Ажлын төлөө
Ажилдаа өөрийгөө зориулдаг, ажлын
хэнээтэй
Идэвхтэй
Эрч хүчтэй, баяр баясгалантай
хөгжилтэй
Өөдрөг үзэлтэй
Итгэж найддаг, эерэгээр ханддаг, уналт алдаанаас амархан сэргэж босдо
Өөртөө итгэлтэй
Өөртөө итгэдэг, өөртөө эрддэг, нүүрэмгий
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянада
Тогтвортой, ганхдаггүй, өөрийгөө хянаж
чаддаг
Зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэ
эрмэлзэлтэй
Хор шартай, өрсөлдөөнч, амжилтад
тэмүүлдэг
Үйлдэлд чиглэсэн
Өөрчлөлтөд үйлдлээр хандда
Дасан зохицох чадвар
Уян хатан, өөрчлөлтөд сайн зохицдо
Шинийг туршда
Шинийг эрж хайдаг, шинэ арга барилыг
туршиж үздэ Зөн совин, алсын хараатай Ирээдүйг зөгнөж, таамагладаг
5 - ТАЙЛБАР
Бусдыг удирдах
Эелдэг нээлттэй
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь ажил дээр бусдад эелдэг, найрсаг, нээлттэй байх хандлагыг илэрхийлдэг. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүсийн хувьд өөрсдийн орчин (хамт олон, бизнесийн түншүүд г.м.)-доо жинхэнэ харилцаа холбоо тогтоох, бусдыг сонсох, өөрсдийн үзэл бодол, мэдрэмжээ чөлөөтэй илэрхийлэхийг зорьдог. Харин бага оноо авсан хүмүүсийн хувьд бусдаас зай барих, албархаг байх, мөн өөрсдийн үзэл бодол, сэтгэгдлийг аль болох бага илэрхийлэх хандлагатай байдаг.
Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь хувь хүний үзэл бодол, эрхээ нээлттэй, гэхдээ зөв байдлаар илэрхийлэх, хамгаалах хандлагыг илэрхийлдэг. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс үзэл бодлоо илэрхийлэхээс татгалздаггүй, зөрчил маргаанаас айдаггүй. Ийм хүмүүс тэр бүр зөв шийдвэр гаргаад байдаггүй. Харин бага оноо авсан хүмүүс дуулгавартай байж, зөрчил маргаанаас зайлсхийх хандлагатай байдаг. Тэд бусдад туслаагүй, эсвэл өөрсдийн сонголтоо хамгаалж чадаагүй явдал нь хожим нь бусдын ашиг сонирхлын эсрэг болох үед гэмшиж харамсдаг.
Хяналт тавьдаг
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь үйл явдалд хяналт тавихыг зорих, өөрийн ажлын арга барилыг хүлээн зөвшөөрүүлэх, эрх мэдэл олж авах зэрэг хандлагыг илэрхийлдэг. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь бусдыг удирдах, өндөр байр суурь бүхий албан тушаалтай байж, ингэснээр үр дүнтэй бөгөөд эрх мэдэлтэйгээр хөндлөнгөөс оролцох дуртай байдаг. Бага оноотой хүмүүс нь бусдыг хүссэнээр нь байлгах, ингэснээр бусдыг өөгшүүлэх буюу хайхрахгүй орхих хандлагатай байдаг.
 
Бусдыг хөгжүүлдэг
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь бусдыг өөрсдийн чадавх, бололцоондоо хүрч, илүү үр ашигтай байхад нь туслахын тулд дэмжих, зааж зөвлөх, урам зориг өгөх хандлага, хүсэл сэтгэлийг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь баг, хамт олныхоо тусын тулд хүн бүрийг өөрсдийн авьяас чадвараа хөгжүүлэхэд нь туслахын төлөө цаг зарцуулах дуртай байдаг. Тэд хүн бүрийн чадавх бололцоонд ямар ч эргэлзээгүйгээр баттай итгэдэг. Харин нөгөө талаас, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь хүн бүрийг хувийн зохион байгуулалт хийх чадвартай гэж үздэг учраас хэтэрхий их тусламж үзүүлэх нь үр ашиггүй байдалд хүргэнэ гэж итгэдэг. Тэд бусдаасаа илүү авьяас чадвартай гэсэн хүмүүстэй илүү их цагийг өнгөрүүлэхийг урьтал болгодог.
Тактикч
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь бусадтай яриа хэлэлцээр хийхдээ тактикч бөгөөд дипломатч буюу эв дүйтэй байх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь харилцагч хүнээ ятгаж үгэндээ оруулах, зөвшөөрүүлэхийн тулд тухайн хүндээ өөрийн яриаг таарч тохируулах хандлагатай байдаг. Тэд мөн өөрсдийн тухай хувийн мэдээллээ бусдад задруулахаас сэргийлж, жинхэнэ бодол санаагаа нуухыг зорьдог. Бага оноо авсан хүмүүс зөнгөөрөө байж, шулуун шударга, үнэнч, ний нуугүй байх хандлагатай байх ба энэ байдал нь өөрсдийнх нь эсрэг ажиллах боломжтой.
Итгэл хүлээлгэдэг
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь бусдад итгэх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс хүн төрөлхтөн төрөлхийн сайн санаатай байдаг гэж итгэх хандлагатай байдаг. Тэд илэрхий анзаарагдахаар ямар нэг зүйл гарч иртэл бусдад итгэдэг бөгөөд сонор сэрэмжээ алдах магадлалтай. Эсрэгээрээ, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь байнга шахам сонор соргог байж, бусдыг харж байдаг. Төрөлхийн хардаж сэрдэх зантай энэ хүмүүс нь авсан мэдээлэл, хүмүүсийн үйл хөдлөлийн цаад санаа сэдэлд үргэлж эргэлзэж, шалгаадаг.
Ажлын арга барил
Зохион байгуулалттай, тууштай


Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь үүрэг даалгаврыг нарийн нягт, нямбай бөгөөд зохион байгуулалттайгаар хийж гүйцэтгэх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь ажлаа маш нарийн, яг таг хийж, төгс төгөлдөрт зорьж тэмүүлдэг бөгөөд энэ нь нэг талаар тэдний бүтээмжийг бууруулж болзошгүй байдаг. Харин бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь хийсэн бүхнээ нэг бүрчлэн эргэж хянах гэж цаг зардаггүй бөгөөд тэд хэнэггүй, зөнгөөрөө, заримдаа алдаа мадагтай байх хандлагатай боловч маш хурдтай ажиллаж чаддаг.
Хууль, дүрэм журмыг сахидаг
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь нийгмээс тогтоосон дүрэм журам, ёс зүйн стандартуудыг чанд дагаж мөрдөх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүст ямар нэг байдлаар ул суурьтай байх хэрэгцээ шаардлага байх бөгөөд тогтоож өгсөн хууль журмыг дагаж мөрдөх хандлагатай байдаг. Тэд заримдаа хатуу чанд байж, ёс горимд хэтэрхий анхаардаг. Харин үүний эсрэгээр, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь аливаа ажил төрлөө амжилттай хийж дуусгахын тулд тодорхой дүрэм журмыг үл хайхрах талтай учраас компанийхаа ашиг сонирхлыг илүү боддог.
Баримт нотолгоонд тулгуурладаг
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь мэдээллийг хэрхэн ойлгож хүлээн авах болон шүүмж дүгнэлт зэргийг хэрхэн хийж буй байдлыг илэрхийлнэ. Илүү ухаалаг хэв шинж бүхий хүмүүс нь үйлдэл дээр үндэслэж дүгнэлт хийх бөгөөд баттай баримт нотолгоо, бодит үр дүнг харгалзан үзсэний үндсэн дээр шийдвэр гаргах хандлагатай. Нөгөө талаас, энэ хэмжээс дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь өөрсдийн шийдвэрийг зөн совин, туршлага дээрээ тулгуурлан гаргах ба нөхцөл байдал бүрийг хүний мөн чанар талаас нь авч үзэх хандлагатай байдаг.
Өөрийгөө удирдах
Ажлын төлөө


Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь өөрийгөө ажилдаа зориулж, түүнээсээ таашаал авах хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь компанидаа өөрийгөө бүрэн зориулж, үүгээрээ хувь хүний онцлог чанараа олж авах гэсэн хэрэгцээ шаардлагатай хүмүүс байдаг. Харин бага оноо авсан хүмүүсийн хувьд үүнээс ялгаатай нь тэд тодорхой орон зайг барьж, ажил болон хувийн амьдралаа заагтай байлгахыг хичээж чармайдаг байна.
Идэвхтэй
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь эрч хүчтэй, нийтэч, сэргэлэн цовоо байх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь нөхцөл байдлыг идэвхтэй, цоглог жавхаатай байдлаар шийдэх хандлагатай байх ба зарим хүмүүсийн нүдэнд хэтэрхий идэвхтэй юм шиг харагддаг байж болно. Нөгөө талаас, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь зожиг, тайван, нухацтай хүмүүс байх ба аливааг сайтар бодож үздэг.
Өөдрөг үзэлтэй
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь эерэг хүлээлт, итгэл найдвартай байх, уналт бүтэлгүйтлээсээ амархан сэргэж босох хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь төрөлхийн өөдрөг үзэлтэй, өөрсдийн алдаа дутагдал, ололт амжилтынхаа өмнө үүрэг хариуцлага хүлээх хандлагатай байдаг. Нөгөө талаас, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь илүү шүүмжлэлтэй, сэтгэлээр унахаас зайлсхийхийн тулд сөрөг талаас нь бодох, хүлээх талтай байдаг.
Өөртөө итгэлтэй
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь өөртөө итгэлтэй байх, өөрийн хүчин чадавхад итгэж найдах хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс өөртөө ховорхон эргэлзэх бөгөөд заримдаа өөрийгөө хэт дөвийлгөх талтай байдаг. Тэд бусад хүмүүс өөрийг нь юу гэж бодож байгааг бодолцдоггүй. Нөгөө талаас, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс өөртөө эргэлздэг, шүүмжлэлд амархан автагддаг. Тэдэнд бусдаар хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх асар их хэрэгцээ байдаг.
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг


Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөлийг танин мэдэх, сэтгэл хөдлөлийн хариу үйлдлүүдээ хянах чадварыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь тогтвортой зантай байх ба стресс, дарамт шахалт зэрэг гадаад орчны хүчин зүйлсэд хялбархан автаад байдаггүй. Онцгой тохиолдолд энэ нь хэнэггүй зантай юм шиг харагддаг. Бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянахдаа сул байх ба цочмог үйлдэл, ширүүн дориун хариу үйлдэл үзүүлдэг.
Зорилгодоо хүрэх чин хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь амбиц, хүсэл тэмүүлэл, хор шар, өрсөлдөх чадвартай байх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь сорилт бэрхшээлд дуртай, өөрсдөдөө өндөр зорилго зорилтыг тавих хандлагатай байдаг. Түүгээр ч барахгүй, тэд хүрч болох ямар ч зүйлийг хийж, өөрсдийн зорилгыг ч давж чаддаг. Нөгөө талаас, бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь одоогийн нөхцөл байдалдаа сэтгэл ханаж, тавьсан зорилгодоо нэгэнт хүрсэн бол тэрийг цааш ахиулах, өөрсдөдөө шинэ зорилго зорилт тавихыг эрмэлздэггүй.
Өөрчлөлтийг удирдах
Шинийг туршдаг
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь шинийг нээх, санаачлах, заримдаа одоо байгаа шийдлийг сольж шинэчлэх хүсэл сэтгэлийг илэрхийлнэ. Өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь ихэнхдээ шинэ арга барил, техник технологийг туршиж үзэх, өдөр тутмын ажил үүргийг хөнгөвчлөх, жинхэнэ шийдлийг олохыг эрмэлздэг. Харин бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь тогтсон заншлын дагуу байж, нэгэнт тогтсон арга барилыг ашиглахыг зорьдог. Тэд аливаа ажлыг урагшлуулахдаа найдвартай байдлыг илүү үнэлж үздэг.
Дасан зохицох чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь өөрчлөлт, шинэлэг байдалд дасан зохицох чадварыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь уян хатан, ямар нэгэн тогтсон дэг журам, зуршилд автагдахгүйгээр тухайн нөхцөл байдалд тааруулан өөрсдийн зан араншинг тохируулах чадвартай байдаг. Бага оноотой хүмүүс нь өөрчлөлтийг эсэргүүцэх хандлагатай байх ба тэдний дадал зуршлыг өөрчлөх хэцүү.
Зөн совин, алсын хараатай
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь “алсын хараатай” байх, чиг хандлага, хэв маягийг ойлгох, ирээдүйг таамаглах хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Өндөр оноотой хүмүүс нь ирээдүйн үйл явдлыг төсөөлж, таамаглах, боломжит үр дүнг урьдчилан мэдэх эрэлт хэрэгцээтэй байдаг. Нөгөө талаас, энэ хэмжээс дээр бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь өнөөдрөөрөө амьдрах нь таатай санагддаг, хэтэрхий их таамаглал хийхийг хүсэх дургүй, тэр ч бүү хэл сэжиглэх хандлагатай байдаг.
Үйлдэлд чиглэсэн
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь тодорхойгүй нөхцөлд ч ахиц дэвшил гаргахын тулд санаачлагыг авах, эрсдэл хийх, бодож үзэхээс илүүтэй үйлдэл хийх хандлагыг илэрхийлнэ. Энэ үзүүлэлтэд өндөр оноо авсан хүмүүс нь өөрсдийн зорилгодоо хурдан хүрч, урагш ахихын тулд ямарваа үйлдэл хийх, эрсдэл гаргахаас татгалздаггүй. Харин бага оноо авсан хүмүүс нь болгоомжтой аядуухан урагшлах, бодож тунгаахад цаг гаргах хандлагатай хүмүүс байдаг.
6 - МЕНЕЖЕРИЙН УР ЧАДВАРЫН ЕРӨНХИЙ ҮНЭЛГЭЭ
Энэ хэсэгт оролцогчийн албан тушаалтай холбогдох үндсэн ур чадваруудын талаар шинжлэн үзнэ. Ажлын байранд хэр тохирч байгаа байдал (0 –ээс 100 хүртэлх хувиар тооцов)-ыг хувь хүний онцлог шинжүүдээс гаргаж авсан. Эдгээр нь холбогдох статистик судалгаа болон онолын загварууд дээр үндэслэсэн болно.
Энэ хэсэгт долоон хэв маягуудад оролцогчийн үзүүлэлтүүдийг харьцуулан дүгнэнэ. Эдгээр менежментийн хэв маягуудыг хүний нөөцийн мэргэжилтнүүд, менежерүүд, эрдэмтэд, судлаачид, багш нараас авсан цуврал судалгаа болон ярилцлагын үр дүнд боловсруулсан болно. Хэв маяг тус бүр багийн удирдлага, зохион байгуулалтын онцгой арга барил, хандлагыг илэрхийлэх болно.
1	Бизнес эрхлэгч хэв маягийн менежер	86%
2	Идэвхжүүлэгч менежер	78%
3	Стратегийн менежер	76%

4	Төслийн менежер	71%
5	Засаглагч хэв маягийн менежер	64%
6	Манлайлагч менежер	63%
7	Гүйцэтгэгч хэв маягийн менежер	41%
Бизнес эрхлэгч хэв маягийн менежер
Маш их эрч хүчээр дүүрэн байдаг бизнес эрхлэгчид нь өөрийн компаний ашиг тусын төлөө шинэлэг санаануудыг ажил хэрэг болгон хэрэгжүүлэхийг дэмждэг. Өөртөө итгэлтэй энэ менежерүүд нь гүйцэтгэлийн маш өндөр стандартыг тогтоож, өөрсдөөсөө ч, бусдаас ч үүнийгээ шаарддаг. Тэд өөрсдийгөө дагуулах, эрсдэл хийх зэрэгт баг хамт олноо өдөөн идэвхжүүлэхдээ чадварлаг. Дипломатч, найрсаг зантай эдгээр хүмүүс нь өөрсдийн сонсогчидтой зохицож, гаргасан шийдвэрээ бусдад тулгахын оронд арга эвийг нь хэрхэн олж зүтгүүлэхээ мэддэг.
Бизнес эрхлэгчид нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Ажил хэргийг ерөнхийд нь удирдах
-	Олон төсөл хөтөлбөр, ажил үүргийг гардан хийх
-	Бүтээлч манлайллаар дамжуулан өсөлтийг дэмжих

Идэвхжүүлэгч менежер
Эрч хүчтэй идэвхжүүлэгчид нь хамтран ажиллагсдынхаа аж амьдралыг маш идэвхтэй сонирхож, хүн бүрийг юу урамшyулж, идэвхжүүлж байгааг ойлгож авахыг эрмэлздэг. Ийм менежерүүд нь бусдад маш таалагддаг. Учир нь тэд өөрсдийн ажилтнуудыг шийдвэр гаргах үйл явцад оролцуулахад цаг гаргахаас гадна тэдэндээ тогтмол хугацаанд бүтээлч санал шүүмж өгөх замаар ажилтнуудынхаа чадавхийг хөгжүүлэхэд туслах хүсэл эрмэлзэлтэй байдаг. Тэд бусдыг бүх чадлаараа ажиллахыг дэмжиж урамшуулах, хүндэтгэж хандах нь баг хамт олны гүйцэтгэлд маш чухал гэж үздэг.
Идэвхжүүлэгчид нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Сургаж дадлагажуулах, багийг босгон байгуулах
-	Урамшуулал, идэвхжүүлэлтийг төлөвлөх
-	Хүнийг хөгжүүлснээр бүтээмжийг нэмэгдүүлэх
 

Стратегийн менежер
Алсын хараатай стратегийн менежерүүд нь одоо хэрэглэж буй ажлын арга барилыг сорих, өөрчлөх дуртай, ажил хийх шинэ хэв маяг, шинэ арга замыг боловсруулахад маш их цаг хугацааг зарцуулдаг. Тэд төсөл хөтөлбөрийг эхлүүлэх, үргэлжлүүлэх, эцэст нь хүргэхээс илүү шинэ төсөл зохиох, бодож боловсруулахыг их сонирхдог. Стратегийн менежерүүдийн хувьд цоо шинэ, бүтээлч санаануудыг бий болгож, гаргах нь урам зориг болж өгдөг.
Стратегийн менежерүүд нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Стратеги төлөвлөгөө боловсруулах
-	Бизнесээ тэлэх төлөвлөгөө
-	Өөрчлөлтийн менежмент
Төслийн менежер
Үр дүндээ хүрэхийг чухалчилдаг төслийн менежерүүд нь бүтээмжийг нэмэгдүүлэх, шинэлэг төслүүдийг удирдах дуртай байдаг. Тэд ажил үүргүүдийг хүмүүсийн ур чадварынх нь дагуу хуваарилахын зэрэгцээ багийнхаа болон төслийн үүрэг хариуцлагыг ч тооцдог. Тавьсан зорилгодоо тогтоосон хугацаандаа хүрэхийн тулд тэд ажил хэргээ болон багийн гишүүн нэг бүрийн ахиц дэвшлийг ойроос ажиглаж байдаг.
Төслийн менежерүүд нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Санаануудыг системтэйгээр хийж гүйцэтгэх
-	Эрэмбэ дараалал тогтоох
-	Ажил үүргийг хуваарилах
Засаглагч хэв маягийн менежер
Засаглагч хэв маягийн менежер нь үүрэг хариуцлага хүлээх, шийдвэр гаргах, шийдвэрээ бусдад тулгах дуртайгаас гадна хүн бүрийн санаа оноог урьдчилан асуух бас дуртай. Тэдний хүнд анхаарал халамж тавьдаг, удирдамж чиглэл өгдөг зан чанар нь ажилтнуудад тодорхой байдлаар аюулгүй байдал, хамгаалалт болж өгдөг. Тэдний бодлоор удирдамж чиглэл өгөх нь маш чухал. Үүний хариуд тэд хүндэтгэл, үнэнч байдлыг хүсэн хүлээх хандлагатай. Мөн шаардлагатай гэвэл бусдыг хянахаас ч татгалзахгүй.
Засаглагч хэв маягийн менежерүүд нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Шийдвэр гаргах
-	Хамгаалалт
-	Хүндэтгэл ба эрх мэдэл

Манлайлагч менежер
Дээд шатны удирдагч болох манлайлагч менежер нь компанийхаа үндсэн зорилгод голлон төвлөрдөг, дагаж мөрдөх ёстой ерөнхий дүрэм журмыг тодорхойлох дуртай байдаг. Үүрэг хариуцлагаа маш гүнзгий ухамсарласан, өөртөө бүрэн итгэлтэй энэ хүмүүс чухал төсөл, ажил хэргийг зөвхөн өөрсдөө л гардан хийж чадна гэж итгэдэг. Тэд бас хүнд хэцүү нөхцөл байдлыг зохицуулахдаа барьц алддаггүй. Тэд хамгийн гол нь ажлын бүтээмж дээр анхаардаг бөгөөд илүү үр ашигтай байхын тулд өөрсдийн шийдвэрийг бусдад тулгах хандлагатай байдаг. Тийм учраас тэд бие даасан байдлыг эрхэмлэх ба зөвхөн асуусан үед л өөрсдийн сонголт шийдвэрээ тайлбарлах цаг гаргадаг.
Манлайлагч менежерүүд нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Хямралын менежмент
-	Нэн чухал төсөл хөтөлбөр, ажил үүргүүд
Гүйцэтгэгч хэв маягийн менежер
Маш өндөр зохион байгуулалттай гүйцэтгэгч хэв маягийн менежер нь нөхцөл байдлыг хэрхэн сайтар задлан шинжилж, үйл ажиллагааны төлөвлөгөөг хэрэгжүүлж, үр ашигтай шийдвэр гаргах вэ гэдгийг мэддэг. Тэд үнэн бодит баримт нотолгоо, нарийн тодорхой төлөвлөгөөтэй ажиллахыг илүүд үзэх бөгөөд тэдэнд зохион байгуулалттай орчинд ажиллах нь илүү амар санагддаг. Тэд байгууллагын өсөлт хөгжлийг дотроо бодолцож, жижиг асуудлуудад анхаарал хандуулахын зэрэгцээ төсөл хөтөлбөрүүдийг ойроос хянаж удирдах хандлагатай.
Гүйцэтгэх хэв маягийн менежерүүд нь ихэвчлэн дараах зүйлс дээр голлон анхаардаг:
-	Төлөвлөлт ба гүйцэтгэл
-	Прагматик байдлаар шийдвэр гаргах
-	Удирдах


Энэ хэсэгт таны үзүүлэлтүүдийг сэтгэлгээний дөрвөн хэв маягт хэрхэн хамаарах байдлыг харьцуулна. Хамгийн төгс хамаарал нь 100%-тай харгалзана.
Доор дурдсан сэтгэлгээний дөрвөн хэв маягийг CTPI-R аргачлалаар гаргасан 19 төрлийн зан араншинд үндэслэн гарган авсан болно. Сэтгэлгээний эдгээр хэв маяг нь Нед Херманны Оюун ухааны давамгайлах загвар (1970)-аас санаа авсан бөгөөд эдгээр нь хувь хүний аливааг ухаарч ойлгох, суралцах, асуудлыг шийдвэрлэх, шийдвэр гаргах байдалд нөлөөлдөг.
1	Дүрслэн бодох	78%
2	Сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй	74%
3	Аналитик буюу задлан шинжлэгч	43%
4	Прагматик	37%
Дүрслэн бодох
Дүрслэн бодох "Дүрслэн боддог" хүмүүс шинэлэг санаанууд дээр төвлөрч, “хайрцаганаас гадуур” буюу өөрийн тогтсон хэв маягаас гарч бодох дуртай байдаг. Ирээдүйн чиг баримжааг таамагладаг эдгээр хүмүүс нь өөрчлөлтийг хүлээн авахдаа сайн бөгөөд эрх чөлөө, уян хатан байдлыг илүү шингээсэн стратегийн ажил үүрэгт сайн тохирдог.
Илүү тэнцвэртэй байхын тулд дүрслэн бодох хэв маяг бүхий хүмүүст дараах зөвлөгөө таарч болох юм:
-	Дүрслэн харж буй зорилго зорилтдоо хүрэхийн тулд илүү чиглэсэн, дэлгэрэнгүй төлөвлөгөө гаргах
-	Баримт нотолгоо, зөн совинг харгалзан үзэхийн ялдамд шинэлэг санаанууддаа бодит, практик байдлаар үнэлэлт дүгнэлт өгөх
Сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй
Сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй "Сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй" хүмүүс нь шийдвэр гаргахын тулд өөрсдийн мэдрэмж, зөн совинд найдах хандлагатай байдаг. Төрөлхийн яриа хөөрөөтэй, олон хүний дунд тайван чөлөөтэй байж чаддаг ийм хүмүүс нь урамшуулал, хөгжил боловсролыг онцгойлж үздэг ажил үүрэгт илүү зохицдог.
Илүү тэнцвэртэй байхын тулд сэтгэлийн хөдөлгөөнтэй хүмүүст дараах зөвлөгөө таарч болох юм:
-	Аливаа нөхцөл байдлын логик талыг нь сэтгэл хөдлөлийн асуудалтай нь хамт авч үзэх
-	Шинэ санаа, санал хүсэлтэд нээлттэй байхын зэрэгцээ төсөл хөтөлбөрийн нарийн ширийн зүйлсийг хянаж байх
Аналитик буюу задлан шинжлэгч
"Задлан шинжлэгч" хэв маягтай хүмүүс нь баримтат мэдээллийг эрхэмлэх бөгөөд логик сэтгэлгээгээ нөхцөл байдлыг бүтээлчээр задлан шинжлэхэд ашиглах дуртай байдаг. Тоон мэдээлэл, бодит байдалд илүү тав тухтай ханддаг энэ хүмүүс нь техникийн өндөр ур чадвар шаарддаг, судалгаа шинжилгээ хийхэд мэргэшсэн ажилд илүү тохирно.
Тэнцвэртэй байхын тулд задлан шинжлэх хэв маяг бүхий хүмүүст дараах зөвлөгөө таарч болох юм:
-	Өргөн хүрээний стратегийн алсын хараандаа бүтээлч болон баримтад суурилсан сэтгэлгээг тусгаж өгөх
-	Хамтаар шийдвэр гаргах байдлыг нэмэгдүүлэх
Прагматик
Прагматик "Прагматик" хүмүүс нь нарийн ширийн зүйлсэд анхаарах хандлагатай ба үйл явцыг үр ашигтайгаар төлөвлөж, хэрэгжүүлдэг, өөрсдийн зохион байгуулалтын ур чадвараа ашиглахдаа таатай байдаг. Ажил гүйцэтгэх эцсийн хугацаа, зохион байгуулалтад илүү тав тухтай ханддаг энэ хүмүүс нь урьдчилан харах чадварыг ихээр хангасан систем, дүрэм процедуртай ажилладаг ажилд илүү зохицно.
Илүү тэнцвэртэй байхын тулд прагматик хүмүүст дараах зөвлөгөө таарч болох юм:
-	Шаардлагатай жижиг сажиг зүйлс дээр анхаарахын зэрэгцээ том зургийг дүрслэн харах
-	Үүрэг даалгаврыг гүйцэтгэх явцдаа бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөл, мэдрэмжийг харгалзан үзэх
Энэ хэсэгт оролцогчийн үзүүлэлтүүдийг ажиллах дөрвөн хэв маягт хамаарах байдлаар нь харьцуулна. Төгс
хамаарал нь 100%-тай харгалзана. Доор дурдсан ажиллах дөрвөн хэв маягийг CTPI-R үнэлгээгээс тодорхойлж гаргасан 19 төрлийн зан араншинд үндэслэн гарган авсан болно. Ажиллах эдгээр хэв маяг нь Уильяам Молтон Марстоны загвар (1928)-аас санаанаас урган гарсан. Марстоны үзэж буйгаар хувь хүмүүс нь хүрээлэн буй орчин нөхцөлөө хэрхэн ойлгон хүлээн авч буй байдал, мөн тэр орчиндоо өөрсдөд нь байгаа гэж мэдэрдэг эрх мэдлийн хэмжээнээс хамаарч өөр өөр зан төлөв гаргадаг байна.
1	Нөлөөлөгч	79%
2	Давамгайлагч	61%
3	Тууштай тогтвортой	48%
4	Дүрэм журмыг дагагч	33%
Нөлөөлөгч
Хүмүүстэй байх сонирхолтой, “Нөлөөлөгч” өндөртэй энэ хүмүүс нь харилцан идэвхтэй байх ба анхаарлын төвд байхдаа тайван ханддаг. Эдгээр хүмүүс нь эерэг, бусдад итгэдэг, шийдвэрийг харилцан зөвшилцөх байдлаар гаргадаг. Бүгдэд таалагддаг энэ хүмүүс нь маш их цагийг харилцаа холбоо тогтооход зарцуулах ба бусдыг амархан ятган үнэмшүүлж чаддаг. Тэд зөв сэтгэгдэл төрүүлэхдээ чадварлаг учраас нөлөө бүхий үүрэг хариуцлага дээр ажиллуулбал өөрсдийн хамаг чадлаа гаргадаг.
Давуу тал:
+ Багийг зоригжуулна
+ Багт уур амьсгал бий болгоно
+ Асуудлыг дипломат аргаар зохицуулна
+ Багт нөлөөлж, ятгана
Сул тал:
-	Хэтэрхий итгэмтгий байж магад
-	Бусдын бодолд хэт эмзэг байж магадгүй
-	Ганцаараа ажиллахад хэцүү байж магадгүй
Давамгайлагч
Сорилтоор удирдуулсан, “Давамгайлагч” ноёлсон энэ хүмүүс нь нэлээд тэвчээргүй бөгөөд ерөнхийдөө эрсдэл хийх дуртай. Ийм хүмүүс санаачлага гаргаж, ажлыг хурдан шуурхай хийхээс гадна өрсөлдөх дуртай. Өөрийн хүчин чармайлтаар амжилтанд хүрсэн эдгээр хүмүүст ажлыг хариуцах эзэн байх нь чухал бөгөөд бусадтай харилцах харилцаа нь хэрэгцээнд тулгуурласан байдаг. Амжилт гаргахын төлөөх тэдний хүсэл тэмүүлэл нь тэднийг маш их ажлын ачааллыг зохицуулах боломжийг олгох бөгөөд тэд эрч хүчээр дүүрэн орчинд санаа амар ажиллаж чаддаг.

Давуу тал:
+ Удирдах үүрэг хариуцлагыг авна
+ Багийн ажиллагааг удирдан захирна
+ Хямралыг зохицуулдаг
+ Шинэ санаа гаргаж, хэрэгжүүлдэг
Сул тал:
-	Жижиг үүрэг хариуцлагад сэтгэл дундуур байдаг
-	Ганцаар ажиллахыг илүүд үздэг
-	Ажлаа бусдад хангалттай хуваарилахгүй
Тууштай тогтвортой
Найдвартай бөгөөд маш их “Тууштай тогтвортой” зантай энэ хүмүүс нь өөрсдийн сэтгэл хөдлөлөө мэдэгдэхгүй шахам байлгахыг илүүд үздэг. Тэдний өндөр түвшинд хөгжсөн төвлөрөл болон хурц гярхай ажигч чанар нь өөрсдийнхөө анхаарлыг ач холбогдол ихтэй үүрэг даалгавруудад л төвлөрүүлэх чадварыг олгодог. Сайн сонсогч байж чаддаг эдгээр хүмүүст халуун дулаан харилцаа таалагдахаас гадна тэд ерөнхийдөө бусдын төлөө сэтгэл тавьж байдаг. Өөрсдийн тэвчээртэй зангаараа танигдсан, аядуу зөөлөн хурдаар сайн ажиллах бөгөөд өөрсдийг нь зохих ёсоор үнэлж байвал дуртай.
Давуу тал:
+ Багт тайван байдлыг авчирна
+ Тогтсон (туршигдаж, батлагдсан) арга барилд дуртай
+ Багт зөвлөх чиг үүрэгтэй
+ Багийн үүрэг амлалтыг түгээн дэлгэрүүлнэ
Сул тал:
-	Баг доторх өөрчлөлтийг зохицуулахад төвөгтэй байж магад
-	Анзаарагдахгүй орхигдож магадгүй
-	Шинэ санаа гаргахаас татгалзаж магадгүй

Дүрэм журмыг дагагч
Зохион байгуулалт сайтай, нямбай зантай “Дүрэм журмыг дагагч” сайтай энэ хүмүүс нь тогтсон дүрэм журам, зохицуулалтын хүрээнд өөрсдийн ажил үүргийг нарийн нягт мөрдөх хандлагатай байдаг. Ийм хүмүүс нь харилцан үйлдлийг хашир болгоомжтой зохицуулж, эргэн тойрондоо анхааралтай байдаг. Тэд тогтвортой ажлын орчин, бүтэц зохион байгуулалт бүхий үүрэг даалгавар гүйцэтгэхийг эрхэмлэдэг. Тэдний ганцаараа ажиллах чадвар нь нягт нямбай байх тухай өндөр стандарт, ажлын чанарт хувь нэмрээ оруулдаг. 
Давуу тал:
+ Баг дотроо ажил үүргийг нарийн зохион байгуулна
+ Маш нягт, нарийн төлөвлөнө
+ Үйл явдлыг удирдана
+ Дүрэм журам мөрдөгдөж буйг шалгаж баталгаажуулна
Сул тал:
-	Хатуу чанга байж магад
-	Шинэлэг байдалд зохицохдоо тааруу байж магад
-	Багаа төгс төгөлдөр байлгах гэж хэт их хямарч магад
-	Бүтэц зохион байгуулалтгүй багт ажиллахад эвгүй байж магадгүй

АЖИЛТНУУДЫН ХАНДЛАГА, УР ЧАДВАРЫГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ТЕСТИЙН НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАН 


















Үнэлгээний зорилго 
 	Энэхүү үнэлгээний зорилго нь  хандлага, ур чадваруудыг үнэлэн, ажилтануудад өөрийгөө таних давуу, сул тулуудаа шинжлэх ухааны үндэслэлтэйгээр тодорхойлон дүгнэхэд чиглэнэ. Үнэлгээний үр дүн нь ажилтнуудын ажиллах нөөц боломжийг тодорхойлох, цаашдын хөгжлийн төлөвлөгөөг боловсруулахад суурь мэдээлэл болно.
Үнэлгээний аргачлал, ашигласан хэмжүүр
	Ашигласан тест: Professional Profile 2 (PP2) тест - Ажилтны хандлага, ур чадварын тест
	Үнэлгээний аргачлал:
Ажилтны хандлага ур чадварыг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ:
	Хандлага ур чадвар: Ажилтны зан төлөв, сэдэлждэг хүчин зүйл, ажиллах хэв маяг, 9 бүлгийн 59 ур чадварыг тодорхойлно. Ажилд сонгон шалгаруулах, шилжилт хөдөлгөөн хийх, сургалтын хэрэгцээг тодорхойлох, хувь хүний карьерын төлөвлөгөө гаргахад ашигладаг. 
	Онооны бүтэц:
	Оноог автоматаар боловсруулж, хувь хүний болон байгууллагын түвшний дундаж болон хамгийн их, хамгийн бага хувийг эзлэж байгаа үзүүлэлтийн утгуудыг тодорхойлоно.
	Оноо 2 түвшинд хуваагдсан:
1-р түвшин:
	6-аас дээш оноо өндөр үзүүлэлтийг илэрхийлнэ.
	4.1-5.9 оноо дундаж үзүүлэлтийг илэрхийлнэ.
	4-өөс доош оноо сул  үзүүлэлтийг илэрхийлнэ.
2-р түвшин:
	70–100%: Сайн хөгжсөн буюу баталгаатай түвшин
	50–69%: Хөгжиж буй / Дундаж түвшин
	0–49%: Хөгжүүлэлт шаардлагатай
Хамрагдсан ажилтнуудын тоо, бүтэц
	Нийт оролцсон ажилтны тоо: 92




Үнэлгээний үр дүнг боловсруулах түлхүүр ойлголт
Энэхүү агуулгыг оруулсан нь байгууллагын үнэт зүйл, зорилго, алсын хараа үйл ажиллагааны чиглэлтэй хандлага ур чадварын тестийн үзүүлэлтүүд уялдаж байгаа эсхийг тодруулах мөн ажилтны хандлага, ур чадварын тестийг байгууллагат илүү оновчтой ашиглах суурь болгон ашигласан болно.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын эрхэм зорилго: Нэгдлийн компаниудаа нэгдсэн бодлого, стратегиар манлайлан удирдаж эрдэс баялгийн үнэ цэнийг нэмэгдүүлж, өнөө болон ирээдүйд үр өгөөж хүртээх тогтолцоог бий болгоно.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын алсын хараа: Монгол Улсын хүнд аж үйлдвэрийн сэргэлтэд манлайлах үүрэг гүйцэтгэж аж үйлдвэрийн гинжин хэлхээг оновчтой бий болгох замаар эрдэс баялгийн үнэ цэнийг нэмэгдүүлнэ.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын үнэт зүйл: Компанийн чадварлаг ажилтан, тэргүүлэх технологи, оновчтой стратеги, манлайлал, тэгш шударга байдлыг үнэт зүйлээ болгон ажиллана.
	Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан байгууллагын үйл ажиллагааны чиглэл: Уул уурхай



















АЖИЛТНЫ ХАНДЛАГА, УР ЧАДВАРЫН ТЕСТ
АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХЬ ЗАН ТӨЛӨВИЙН ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД
Хүснэгт 1. Ажлын байран дахь зан төлөвийн үзүүлэлтийн дундаж оноо болон тайлбар
Зан төлөвийн үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	Дундаж онооны тайлбар
Ятган нөлөөлдөг	4.32	Дундаж	Бусдыг ятгах, бусдад нөлөөлөхгүй байхыг хичээдэг тул мэдээллийг яг байгаагаар нь танилцуулахыг илүүд үздэг. Аливаа зүйлийг ихэвчлэн шуудхан хэлчихдэг ч өөрийн нөлөөлж чадах мэдэх зүйл дээрээ ятган үнэмшүүлэх аргыг ашиглах магадлалтай. 
Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг	4.67	Дундаж	Тууштай зантай, өөрийн байр сууриасаа хазайдаггүй. Гэхдээ маш сайн ятгасан тохиолдолд буулт хийж чаддаг. Бусдад хатуу шудрага харагддаг. Санал  зөрөлдөх үед төвийг сахихаас илүү өөрийн үзэл бодлыг дагах хандлагатай.
Нээлттэй харилцдаг	4.57	Дундаж	 Нийтэч ярисаг талтай, найрсаг харилцааг анхаардаг ба бусадтай харилцах орчин хэрэгтэй байдаг. 
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг	5.75	Дундаж	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах гэж хичээдэг ч стресстэй нөхцөлд хяналтаа алдах магадлалтай. Орчиндоо мэдрэмтгий ханддаг ажилтнууд их ба сэтгэл хөдлөлөө шууд илэрхийлэх талтай. 
Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг	4.04	Дундаж	Зохион байгуулалт харьцангуй сайтай, тогтсон арга барил сайтай ажилладаг. Төлөвлөгөөгөө урьдчилан гаргаж дагаж мөрдөхийг хичээдэг. 
Баримтад тулгуурлаж шийдвэр гаргадаг	6.94	Өндөр	Шийдвэр гаргахдаа объектив байдлаар, логиктой, задлан шинжилж, үндэслэлтэйгээр ханддаг.
Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг	6.06	Өндөр	Байгууллагын тогтоосон дүрэм журмыг байх ёстой гэдэгт итгэдэг. Аливаа зүйл дээр тогтсон дүрэм журмыг дагах гэж хичээдэг. 






 

Онооны ангилал
	Ятган нөлөөлдөг 	Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг 	Нээлттэй харилцдаг 	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг 	Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг	Баримтад тулгуурлаж шийдвэр гаргадаг 	Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг 
1-4 (сул хөгжсөн)	49%	36%	38%	24%	51%	7%	11%
4.1-5.9 (дундаж)	37%	41%	37%	25%	33%	20%	36%
6-аас их (өндөр хөгжсөн)	14%	23%	25%	51%	15%	73%	53%
Үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан ажилтнуудын 7 үзүүлэлтийг хамгийн их, хамгийн бага түвшинөөр харьцуулхад  нийтлэг Сайн-Дунд зарим тохиолдолд дунджаас доогуур үнэлгээтэй гарсан байна. Үүнд:
Зан төлөвийн өндөр үзүүлэлт:
•	Баримтад тулгуурладаг – Шийдвэр гаргахдаа нотолгоо баримт дээр үндэслэн шийдвэр гаргадаг байдал нийт ажилнуудын 73% нь өндөр үзүүлэлттэй байна.
•	Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг - дотоод зохион байгуулалт, дэг журам сахих хандлага сайн байна.
Дундаж хөгжсөн үзүүлэлт: 
•	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах – сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдал, тайван байдал 6-аас их оноотой ажилтнууд 51%, дундаж оноотой ажилтнууд 25% буюу нийт ажилтнууд сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянаж удирдаж чаддаг. Гэхдээ зарим бага оноотой ажилтнуудын сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах тал дээр анхаарах хэрэгтэй. 

Зан төлөвийн сул үзүүлэлт: 
•	Ятган нөлөөлөх чадвар – харилцааны арга барил нь илүү санаагаа шулуухан ил тод илэрхийлдэг, харилцааны эв дүй сул байх магадлалтай. 
•	Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг – шинэ нөхцөл байдалд хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэх, шийдвэр гаргах хурд сул.
•	Нээлттэй харилцдаг – харилцааны хувьд нээлттэй болон нээлттэй бус үзүүлэлтүүд 6-аас их оноо 25%, 4-өөс бага оноо 38%-той энэ нь илүү дотогшоо хүмүүс зонхилж байна.  
•	Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг – үзүүлэлт сул байсан ба өөрийн үзэл бодолдоо тууштай шийдэмгий хүмүүс илүү олон байгааг харуулж байна.



АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХЬ ҮНЭТ ЗҮЙЛ, СЭДЭЛЖДЭГ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛСИЙН ШИНЖИЛГЭЭ
Хүснэгт3.  Ажлын байран дахь үнэт зүйл,сэдэлждэг хүчин зүйлсийн үзүүлэлтийн дундаж онооны тайлбар 
Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл	Дундаж оноо	Үнэлгээний ангилал	Дундаж онооны тайлбар
Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг	4.49	Дундаж 	Үүрэг хариуцлагыг түрүүнд тавих, ажилдаа сэтгэлээсээ ханддаг ч өөрийн хувийн асуудалдаа мөн цаг заваа гаргах ёстойг мэддэг. 
Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай	3.87	Сул	Бусдаас заавар зөвлөгөө авхыг хүсдэг. Бусдыг удирдан ажиллах хүсэлгүй ба харин өөрөө бусдаар удирдуулан ажиллах дуртай
Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай	4.12	Дундаж	Хурдан хугацаанд үр дүнг нь бүрэн харах боломжтой богино хугацааны ажлыг илүүд үзэх хандлагатай ч нөлөө бүхий урт хугацааны ажлыг ч мөн хийх дуртай.  
Амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй	4.84	Дундаж	Ажлын тогтвортой байдалд дуртай. Тодорхой хэмжээний өрсөлдөөн байх ёстой гэж үздэг ч байгаа зүйлдээ сэтгэл хангалуун байдаг. 
Бие дааж ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай	4.10	Дундаж	Бүлгээрээ ажиллах, хамтран ажиллахдаа дуртай, багийн харилцан хамаарал дээр анхаарал хандуулхыг хичээдэг.
Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг	5.84	Дундаж	Өөрийн цаг зав, нөөц боломжоо бусдын төлөө зориулж, тэдний сайн сайхны төлөө хувь нэмрээ оруулахыг хүсэх эрмэлзэлтэй.
Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч	5.72	Дундаж	Өөрчлөлт шинэчлэлтэд дуртай ч тогтсон арга барил дадлыг илүү сайжруулах талаас анхаардаг. Томоохон ажил эсвэл асуудал дээр дадсан арга барилаараа ажиллахыг илүүд үзнэ. 
 
Хүснэгт 4.  Нийт ажилтнуудын үнэт  зүйл, сэдэлждэг хүчин зүйлсиййн үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал	Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг 	Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай 	Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай	Амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй 	Бие дааж ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай 	Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг 	Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч 
1-4 (сул хөгжсөн)	38%	60%	48%	40%	52%	13%	18%
4.1-5.9 (дундаж)	43%	25%	39%	37%	36%	39%	33%
6-аас их (өндөр хөгжсөн)	17%	15%	12%	23%	12%	48%	49%
Дундаж хөгжсөн үзүүлэлт: 
•	“Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг” үзүүлэлт бусдын төлөө үйл хэрэг хийх зүйлд сэдэлжих ба энэ нь мөн байгууллагын үзэт зүйлтэй нийцэж байна. 
•	Шуурхай байдал, ажлыг тэргүүнд тавих хандлага, үр дүнг эрхэмлэдэг хандлага дундаж буюу илүү ажлыг нухацтай төлөвлөх, урт хугацааны ажил үүрэгт сэдэлжих хандлага хосолмол байна.
•	“Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч” чадамж дундау байгаа нь инноваци, шинэ санаа дэмжих соёлд суурь болно. Гэхдээ уламжлалт арга барил дүрмыг дагах хандлага хосолмол байна.
•	Амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзэл нь хөгжих, суралцах, карьер ахиулах хүслийг илэрхийнэ. Гэхдээ уг үнэлгээний дундаж нь 4.10 оноотой байсан нь илүү байг илүү байгаа зүйлдээ талархаж одоо байгаа зүйлдээ сэтгэл ханадаг гэсэн утгатай.
•	“Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай” үзүүлэлт 4.84 байгаа нь бусдыг удирдан чиглүүлэж зааж зөвлөх мөн өөртөө заавар зөвлөгөө авах дуртай хандлага холимог байгааг харуулж байна. 
•	Бие дааж ганцаараа ажилдаг байдлаас илүү багаар хамын ажиллагааг дэмждэг тал илүү байгаа ба энэ нь өөрт оноогдсон бие даан хийх ажил дээр хүндрэлтэй санагдуулдаг болхыг харуулж байна. 
Анхаарах шаардлагатай үзүүлэлт:
•	Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг үзүүлэлт сул байгаа нь илүү ажил амьдралын тэнцвэртэй байдалд сэдэлжин ажиллана. Энэ нь ажлын уян хатан цагтай байхаас гадна ажлыг зөвхөн ажлын байранд гэсэн хэв маягтай ажиллаж амьдрах дуртай байдлыг илэрхийлнэ. 

АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХЬ ХАНДЛАГА, ХАМТРАН АЖИЛЛАХ ХЭВ МАЯГИЙН ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ
Хүснэгт 5.  Ажлын байран дахь хандлага, ажиллах хэв маягийн үзүүлэлтийн дундаж онооны тайлбар 
Үзүүлэлт	Дундаж оноо	Дундаж онооны тайлбар
Зөн совин мэдрэмжтэй	42.4	Тодорхойгүй нөхцөл байдлыг амархан зохицуулах чадвартай, уян хатан хандлагатай бөгөөд шинэлэг зүйлд нээлттэй.
Хянуур, нягт нямбай	67.0	Дүрэм журмыг баримтлан, нямбай гүйцэтгэх, уламжлалт арга барилаар ажиллах дуртай.
Бодлоготой хүлээцтэй	64.1	Тэвчээр хатуужил, тэнцвэртэй байдлаараа онцлог, тайван, тогтвортой ажиллах дуртай
Эрч хүчтэй, идэвхтэй	53.1	Эрч хүч, идэвхитэй, урам зоригтой ажилладаг, илүү амьдралд хэрэгжих боломжтой зүйлд дуртай.
Бие дааж ганцаараа ажилладаг	52.1	Өөртөө засаг тогтоох, өөрийн хүчинд итгэх хэрэгцээгээр ялгардаг, хяналтгүйгээр ажиллаж, ганцаараа ажиллахдаа тааламжтай байдаг
Нийтэч хамтач	63.6	Харилцаа сайтай, ажлын эерэг уур амьсгал бүрдүүлэх талд илүү анхаардаг.
Шийдэмгий, нөлөөлөгч   	49.7	Шаргуу бөгөөд бусдыг  чадварлагаар шийдэмгийгээр ятгах чадварыг илэрхийлнэ.
Багаар ажилладаг	62.8	Нийцэх шалтгаан олох, хамтран ажиллаж буй хүмүүсийнхээ хэрэгцээг ойлгох байдлаар үл зөвшилцөлд шийдэл олохоор ажиллах дуртай. 
Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг	45.7	Ажилдаа өөрсдийгөө зориулж, сэтгэл санааны хувьд ажил болон байгууллагатайгаа холбогдсон байх дуртай байдлыг илэрхийлнэ. 
 
Хүснэгт 4.  Нийт ажилтнуудын хандлага, ажиллах хэв маягын үзүүлэлтийн оноог хувиар илэрхийлсэн байдал
Онооны ангилал / Үзүүлэлтүүд	0-49	50-69	70-100
Зөн совин мэдрэмжтэй	73%	26%	1%
Хянуур, нягт нямбай	9%	51%	40%
Бодлоготой хүлээцтэй	11%	60%	29%
Эрч хүчтэй, идэвхтэй	36%	59%	5%
Бие дааж ганцаараа ажилладаг	41%	52%	7%
Нийтэч хамтач	13%	59%	28%
Шийдэмгий, нөлөөлөгч	50%	46%	4%
Багаар ажилладаг	15%	58%	26%
Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг	63%	30%	7%
Өндөр үзүүлэлт:
•	Хянуур нягт нямбай, бодлоготой хүлээцтэй ажиллах хэв маяг өндөр оноотой гарсан нь ажилтнуудын хандлага тогтвортой, эрсдэлээс зайлсхийх, үйл ажиллагаагаа нарийн төлөвлөж, журмын дагуу явуулах чиглэл давамгай байгааг илтгэнэ. Доорх өндөр хөгжсөн ажиллах хэв маягийн үзүүлэлтийн задаргааг олон улсад шаарддаг оноо болон тус байгууллагын авсан оноотой харьцуулсан байдлаар гаргасан.
“Хянуур, нягт нямбай” үзүүлэлтиййн задаргаа:

№	Үзүүлэлт	Шаардагдах оноо	Үр дүнгийн оноо
1	Дүрэм журам дагадаг	8 - 10	6.06
2	Баримтад тулгуурлаж шийдвэр гаргадаг	10	6.94
3	Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг	0	4.04
4	Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч	1 - 3	5.84

“Бодлоготой, хүлээцтэй” үзүүлэлтийн задаргаа: Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд 
 
№	Үзүүлэлт	Шаардагдах оноо	Үр дүнгийн оноо
1	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг	7 - 9	5.75
2	Нээлттэй харилцдаг	1 - 2	4.57
3	Шууртай гүйцэтгэх дуртай	0 - 1	4.12
4	Амжилтанд хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй	1 - 2	4.10

Анхаарах талууд:
•	Байгууллагын үйл ажиллагаа, салбарын онцлогоос хамаарч ажиллах хэв маяг хандлага нь хянуур, нягт нямбай, бодлоготой хүлээцтэй байх нь давуу тал болно. Гэхдээ ийм маяг өндөр байдаг хүмүүст идэвх санаачилга сул байдаг. Иймд шинийг санаачлагчдыг урамшуулах, бүтэлгүйтлийг хүлээн зөвшөөрдөг “туршиж үзэх” орчныг бий болгох, инновацын жижиг төслүүд хэрэгжүүлэхийг дэмжих, оролцоог хангаж идэвхжүүлэх хэрэгтэй. 
•	Мөн бие дааж, ганцаараа ажиллах, эрч хүчтэй идэвхтэй үзүүлэлтүүд дундаж 52.1 болон 53.1 байгааг анхаарч залуучуудын оролцоог нэмэгдүүлэх, ажлын бүтээмжийн системд хувь хүний санаачилга, үр дүнг үнэлэх шалгуур оруулж үзэхийг зөвлөж байна. 









АЖИЛТНУУДЫН АЖЛЫН БАЙРАН ДАХ ӨРСӨЛДӨХ ЧАДВАРУУД
Энэ хэсэгт нийт үнэлгээнд хамрагдсан ажилтнуудын 9 бүлэг чадавхын 59 ур чадварын онооны дунджаар байгууллагын түвшинд ажлын байран дахь өрсөлдөх ур чадварыг тодорхойлсон болно.  
9 бүлгийн чадавхын дундаж үзүүлэлт:  
 
Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК-ийн ажилчдын 9 бүлгийн чадавхын 59 ур чадварын үзүүлэлтээс хамгийн өндөр гарсан нь “Байгууллагын үнэт зүйл соёл, эерэг уур амьсгал бүрдүүлэх” бүлэг ур чадвар гарсан байна. Энэ нь үнэт зүйлийг эрхэмлэх, ёс зүйн хэм хэмжээг баримтлах чадавхтай болхыг харуулж байна. 
•	Ажилтнуудын хөгжих боломжтой ур чадварууд
•	Ажилтнуудын хөгжиж буй ур чадвар
•	Ажилтнуудын сул хөгжсөн ур чадварууд
 
Хамгийн их оноотой 4 ур чадвар: 
Ажилтнуудын ур чадварын үзүүлэлт дээр 70%-аас өндөр хөгжсөн ур чадвар байхгүй. Энэ нь байгууллагын сургалт хөгжүүлэлт, ур чадварын үнэлгээ, гүйцэтгэлийн үнэлгээ гэх арга зүй дутагдалтай байгааг харуулж байна. 
Эдгээр нь байгууллагын чанар, стандарт, хариуцлагатай байдал сайнаар төлөвшсөнийг илтгэнэ:
1.	Эрсдэлийг удирдах чадвар– 73%
2.	Анализ хийх чадвар - 72%
3.	Илтгэх чадвар  - 72%
4.	Цагийн менежмент – 71%
5.	Зохион байгуулах чадвар – 70%
Байгууллагат эдгээр ур чадвар өндөр байх нь байгууллын үйл ажиллагаа, зорилго чиглэлтэй нийцэж байгаа ба эдгээр чадваруудыг ажилтнуудын суурь ур чадвар болгон гарч ирэх боломжтой. 
Эрсдэлийг удирдах чадварын задаргаа: 
 
№	Үзүүлэлт	Шаардагдах оноо	Үр дүнгийн оноо
1	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянадаг	6 - 8	4.13
2	Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг 	1 - 3	6,39
3	Баримтад тулгуурладаг	7 - 9	3,95
4	Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг	6 - 8	4,91
5	Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай	1 - 3	4,51
6	Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч	6 - 8	5,23

Хамгийн бага оноотой  ур чадвар :
Эдгээр ур чадварууд нь ажилтнуудын ажилтнууд өсөн дэвших сонирхолгүй, тогтсон хэв загвартай, олон нийттэйй харилцдаг ажилтнуудын хувьд харилцааны ур чадварын суурь болон туслах ур чадварууд сул талтай байгааг харуулж байна:
1.	Хичээл зүтгэл гаргах чадвар – 40%
2.	Борлуулалт хийх чадвар -  40%
3.	Бусдыг татах чадвар-40%
4.	Санаачилгатай байх чадвар-38%   
5.	Хүмүүсийн холбоо, танилын хүрэгээ тэлэх чадвар– 38%

Санаачилгатай байх чадварын задаргаа:  
№	Үзүүлэлт	Шаардагдах оноо	Үр дүнгийн оноо
1	Аливааг бэлтгэлгүй хийж чаддаг	6 - 8	4.04
2	Дүрэм журмыг дагадаг	1 - 3	6.06
3	Ажлыг нэн тэргүүнд тавьдаг	6 - 8	3.87
4	Удирдан чиглүүлэх дуртай	6 - 8	4.84
5	Шуурхай гүйцэтгэх дуртай	7 - 9	4.12
6	Амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзэлтэй	6 - 8	4.10
7	Бие дааж ганцаараа ажиллах дуртай	9 - 10	4.49
8	Шинийг эрэлхийлэгч	7 - 9	5.72

Энэ нь байгуулагат манлайлалтын хөтөлбөр, сэдэлжүүлэх хөтөлбөр, санаачлагатай, нөлөөлөх чадвар дээр анхаарах хэрэгтэйг харуулж байна. 
Нийт ур чадварын үнэлгээг ангилж үзвэл:
Ангилал	Ур чадварын тоо	Хувь (%)
Сайн хөгжсөн (70↑)	5 ур чадвар	~8%
Дунд түвшинд (41–69)	32 ур чадвар	~54%
Сул хөгжсөн (≤40)	24 ур чадвар	~41%
Сайн хөгжсөн ур чадварууд байхгүй (5 буюу ~8%)
Байгууллагын ажилтнуудын ерөнхий ур чадварын түвшинд сайн хөгжсөн ур чадвар цөөн байна. Энэ нь тухайн байгууллагын хүний нөөцийн сургалт, хөгжлийн бодлого нь хязгаарлагдмал хүрээнд хэрэгжиж байх магадлалтай. Ажилтнуудыг хөгжүүлэх, ажилдаа хандах хандлага, идэвх оролцооны хөтөлбөр сул байгааг харуулж байна. 
Дунд түвшинд хөгжсөн ур чадварууд олон (32 буюу ~54%)
Ажилтнуудын чадамжуудын ихэнх нь дунд түвшинд байгаа нь богино хугацаанд сайжруулах боломжтойг харуулж байна. Энэ ангилал дахь ур чадваруудыг сайтар хөгжүүлбэл байгууллагын нийт чадамж мэдэгдэхүйц дээшлэх боломжтой.
Сул хөгжсөн ур чадвар давамгайлж байна (24 буюу ~41%)
Ажлын байранд шаардагдах ур чадварын 41% нь шаардлагад хүрээгүй байна.
Энэ нь:
	Ажлын байран дээр тасралтгүй сургалтын тогтолцоо сул
	Чадамжид суурилсан үнэлгээ, хөгжлийн төлөвлөгөө системтэй хийгддэггүй
	Манлайллын соёл сул: ажилтнууд санаачилга гаргах, идэвхтэй байх орчин нөхцөлгүй
	Хувь хүний талаас өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх сонирхолгүй байх магадлалтай

ТАЙЛАНГИЙН НЭГДСЭН ДҮГНЭЛТ
92 ажилтан хамрагдсан уг үнэлгээний хүрээнд байгууллагын ажилтнуудын ур чадвар, хандлага, сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл, борлуулалтын чадамжийг тодорхойлон дүгнэлт гаргалаа. Тайлан нь ажилтнуудын давуу ба хөгжүүлэх шаардлагатай талуудыг танин мэдэж, цаашдын сургалт, хөгжлийн бодлого боловсруулахад чиглэж байна.
Мөн байгууллагын үнэт зүйл, алсын хараа, эрхэм зорилготой уялдуулан хүний нөөцийн бодлогыг боловсронгуй болгох суурь болгон ашиглах боломжтой болно.

БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ҮНЭТ ЗҮЙЛ, ЗОРИЛГО, ҮЙЛ АЖИЛЛАГААНЫ ЧИГЛЭЛТЭЙ УЯЛДУУЛСАН ТАЙЛБАР 
Байгууллагын үнэт зүйл / Зорилго	Холбогдох ур чадвар, хандлага	Уялдааны тайлбар
Чадварлаг ажилтан – хариуцлагатай, мэргэжлийн, тогтвортой гүйцэтгэл	Баримтад тулгуурлаж шийдвэр гаргах (6.94), дүрэм журмыг дагах (6.06), хянуур нягт нямбай (67.0)	Ажилтнуудын хандлага байгууллагын “чадварлаг ажилтан”-ы үнэт зүйлтэй уялдаж, хариуцлагатай, дэг журамтай, системтэй ажиллах хандлага давамгайлж байна.
Оновчтой стратеги, төлөвлөлт – үр дүнг тооцдог, аналитик сэтгэлгээтэй ажиллах	Зохион байгуулах чадвар (70%), анализ хийх чадвар (72%), эрсдэлийг удирдах чадвар (73%)	Стратегийн гүйцэтгэлд шаардагдах аналитик ба системийн ур чадвар өндөр түвшинд байна.
Манлайлал, хамтын ажиллагаа – бусдыг урамшуулах, нөлөөлөх, итгэлцэлд тулгуурласан харилцаа	Нийтэч хамтач (63.6), багаар ажилладаг (62.8), бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан (4.67), ятган нөлөөлөх (4.32)	Хамтын ажиллагааны суурь сайн боловч уян хатан байдал, нөлөөлөх чадвар дунд түвшинд байна.
Тэгш шударга ёс, ёс зүй – үнэт зүйл, хариуцлагыг эрхэмлэх	Бусдыг нэн тэргүүнд тавих (5.84), үнэт зүйлээ эрхэмлэх үзүүлэлтүүд өндөр	Ёс зүйн хандлага, шударга байдал сайн төлөвшсөн, байгууллагын соёлд нийцэж байна.
Уул уурхайн салбарын онцлог – эрсдэлийн удирдлага, хяналт, нарийн зохион байгуулалт	Бодлоготой хүлээцтэй (64.1), дүрэм журмыг баримтлах (6.06), сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах (5.75)	Салбарын онцлогт тохирсон хянуур, тогтвортой хандлага давамгайлж байгаа нь үйл ажиллагааны аюулгүй байдалд эерэг нөлөөтэй.

ДАВУУ БОЛОН СУЛ ТАЛ: 
Давуу талууд: 
1.	Ажилтнуудын баримтад тулгуурлан шийдвэр гаргах (оноо 6.94), дүрэм журмыг дагах (6.06), эрсдэлийг удирдах (73%), анализ хийх (72%) зэрэг ур чадварууд өндөр түвшинд байна. Энэ нь байгууллагын хариуцлагатай, дэг журамтай, системтэй ажиллагааг дэмжиж, салбарын онцлогт нийцсэн тогтвортой гүйцэтгэлийн соёлыг бүрдүүлж байна.
2.	Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянах (5.75) болон бусдын төлөө хандлага (5.84) үзүүлэлтүүд дундаас дээш түвшинд байгаа нь байгууллагын үнэт зүйл болох шударга ёс, хамтын хариуцлага, ёс зүйн соёл төлөвшсөнийг илтгэнэ.

3.	Эдгээр дүн нь Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК-ийн ажилтнуудын дунд ажлын сахилга бат, зохион байгуулалт, ёс зүй, хариуцлага өндөр түвшинд төлөвшсөнийг харуулж, байгууллагын стратегийн хэрэгжилт, гүйцэтгэлийн чанарыг баталгаажуулах чухал хүчин зүйл болж байна.
Сул талууд:
1.	Манлайлал, нөлөөлөх чадвар (оноо 4.32), санаачилга ба идэвх (38%), инноваци ба шинийг эрэлхийлэх (5.72), харилцааны уян хатан байдал (4.67) зэрэг үзүүлэлтүүд дунд болон доогуур түвшинд гарсан байна. Энэ нь ажилтнууд тогтсон арга барил, дүрэм журмыг баримтлах хандлагатай, шинэ санаа гаргах болон бусдад нөлөөлөх ур чадвар сул байгааг илтгэнэ. 

2.	Амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзэл (4.10), хичээл зүтгэл гаргах чадвар (40%) бага байгаа нь ажилтнуудын дотоод сэдэл, гүйцэтгэлд чиглэсэн урамшууллын тогтолцоо хангалтгүй байгааг харуулж байна.

3.	Эдгээр үр дүн нь байгууллагын дотоод орчинд инноваци, манлайллын өсөлт, бүтээлч орчны хөгжил харьцангуй сул байгааг, мөн ажилтнуудын өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх идэвх ба хариуцлагын сэдэл дутмаг байгааг илтгэнэ.


СУРГАЛТ ХӨГЖҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН САНАЛ БОЛГОЖ БУЙ ХӨТӨЛБӨР
Сэдэв / чиглэл	Зорилго	Хэрэгжүүлэх хэлбэр	Хүлээгдэх үр дүн
Манлайлал ба нөлөөлөх чадвар	Бусдыг чиглүүлэх, нөлөөлөх, шийдвэр гаргах манлайллыг хөгжүүлэх	Манлайллын шаталсан сургалт, коучинг, peer learning	Дунд шатны менежерүүдийн манлайллын чадамж өснө, санаачилга нэмэгдэнэ
Идэвх санаачилга ба инновац	Шинэ санаа дэвшүүлэх, бүтээлч сэтгэлгээ хөгжүүлэх	Design Thinking, Creative Problem Solving workshop	Инновацын жижиг төслүүд хэрэгжиж, бүтээлч орчин бүрдэнэ
Харилцаа ба хамтын ажиллагаа	Багийн уур амьсгал, итгэлцэл, уян хатан харилцааг сайжруулах	Team dynamics, communication & feedback training	Хамтын ажиллагааны уур амьсгал сайжирч, зөрчил багасна
Сэдэл ба гүйцэтгэл	Ажилтнуудын дотоод сэдэл, амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзлийг нэмэгдүүлэх	Performance motivation, career mapping sessions	Гүйцэтгэлийн хариуцлага, үр дүнгийн төвшинг нэмэгдүүлнэ
Хувийн бүтээмж ба цагийн менежмент
	Хувийн хариуцлага, ажлын үр нөлөөг нэмэгдүүлэх	Productivity & focus training, time management workshop	Бүтээмж, хичээл зүтгэл сайжирч, ажлын чанар дээшилнэ

Цаашид авах арга хэмжээ:
1.	Манлайлал хөгжүүлэх
Байгууллагын бүх түвшний удирдлагад зориулсан шаталсан сургалт, коучинг болон менторингийн хөтөлбөрийг хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай. Энэ нь шийдвэр гаргах чадвар, стратегийн сэтгэлгээ, бусдад нөлөөлөх, урамшуулах манлайллын ур чадварыг системтэйгээр төлөвшүүлнэ. Үүний үр дүнд байгууллагад манлайллын нэгэн жигд соёл төлөвшиж, дотоод нөлөөллийн орчин бий болно.
2.	Санаачилга ба инновац
Шинэ санаа, бүтээлч шийдлийг дэмжих урамшууллын орчныг бүрдүүлэх нь чухал. “Туршиж үзэх” соёлыг төлөвшүүлж, алдаа гаргахыг зөвшөөрдөг, шинэлэг орчныг дэмжих замаар ажилтнуудын идэвх, оролцоог нэмэгдүүлнэ. Ингэснээр байгууллага инновацид тулгуурласан хөгжлийн шинэ түвшинд хүрч, уян хатан, бүтээлч багууд төлөвшинө.
3.	Харилцаа ба хамтын ажиллагаа
Ажилтнуудын хоорондын итгэлцэл, хамтын орчныг сайжруулах зорилгоор харилцааны ур чадварыг хөгжүүлэх сургалт, багийн уур амьсгалыг бэхжүүлэх хөтөлбөрийг тогтмолжуулах шаардлагатай. Хэлтэс, охин компаниуд хоорондын хамтын ажиллагааг сайжруулах, мэдээлэл солилцоо болон хөндлөн холбоог идэвхжүүлэх нь байгууллагын үр ашиг, нэг багийн соёлыг төлөвшүүлэхэд чухал нөлөө үзүүлнэ.
4.	Сэдэл ба гүйцэтгэл
Гүйцэтгэлд суурилсан үнэлгээ, урамшууллын тогтолцоог боловсронгуй болгож, үр дүнгээс хамааран урамшуулал олгох механизмыг сайжруулах хэрэгтэй. Ингэснээр ажилтнуудын хичээл зүтгэл, оролцоо нэмэгдэж, байгууллагын гүйцэтгэлийн соёл төлөвшинө. Мөн ажлын гүйцэтгэлийг хувь хүний хөгжлийн зорилго, карьер төлөвлөлттэй уялдуулах нь сэдлийг урт хугацаанд хадгалах нөхцөл болно.
5.	  Хувийн бүтээмж 
Ажилтнуудын цагийн менежмент, хувийн хариуцлага, төвлөрөл, ажлын үр дүнг сайжруулах сургалт, дадлага хэрэгжүүлэх шаардлагатай. Ажлын төлөвлөлт, зорилгоо тодорхойлох чадварыг хөгжүүлснээр байгууллагын бүтээмж, гүйцэтгэлийн чанар мэдэгдэхүйц дээшилнэ. Мөн ажил-амьдралын тэнцвэрийг хангах дэмжлэг үзүүлэх нь урт хугацааны тогтвортой үр дүнд хүргэнэ.




СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛСИЙГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ТЕСТИЙН НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАН - УДИРДЛАГА





































СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛСИЙГ ТОДОРХОЙЛОХ ТЕСТ 

MOTIVATION+ нь Central Test-ээс хувь хүний хийж буй ажил мэргэжилдээ урам зориг/сэдэлжүүлэлт авах хүчин зүйлсийг хэмжихэд зориулагдан боловсруулсан үнэлгээ юм.

Энэхүү тайлан нь тестийн үр дүнд үндэслэсэн дүгнэлт болно.

Ажлын байран дах гол 15 сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл болон тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийг хэмжинэ. Эдгээр 15 хүчин зүйлүүд нь 3 бүлэг сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлст хуваагдаж байгааг доор харууллаа.

ҮНЭЛГЭЭНИЙ АРГАЧЛАЛ, АШИГЛАСАН ХЭМЖҮҮР 
 
▪	Ашигласан тест: Motivation
▪	Тестийн ангилал: Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг тодорхойлох тест
▪	Үнэлгээний үзүүлэлт: Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс, байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс, нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс 3 бүлгийн 15 үзүүлэлт тус бүрээр сэдэл болон сэтгэл ханамжийн түвшинг тодорхойлно. 
▪	Оноог автоматаар боловсруулж утгуудыг тогтооно
▪	Оноо 6 түвшинд хуваагдсан бөгөөд, цаашид нөлөөллийн хувьд ач холбогдол багатай оноог тайлан боловсруулалтанд тооцоогүй болно. 

Түвшин	Оноо 	Нэршил  
	Тайлбар 

1	1.0-2.9	Сэдэлждэггүй 	Мотивацад бараг нөлөөгүй хэрэгцээ
2	3.0-4.4	Сул сэдэлждэг 	Харьцангуй сул, идэвхгүй илэрдэг хэрэгцээ
3	4.5-5.9	Заримдаа сэдэлждэг 	Нөлөөлж болох ч ач холбогдол өндөр биш

4	6.0-7.4	Сэдэлждэг	Ажиллах урам зоригт нөлөөлөхүйц сэдэлжүүлэгч болдог. 

5	7.5-8.9	Их сэдэлждэг  	Сэдэлжүүлэгч  хүчин зүйл болдог. 

6	9.0-10 	Маш их сэдэлждэг 	Хамгийн хүчтэй сэдэлжүүлэгч болдог. 


       Тайлбар: Тайлангийн энэ хэсэгт үнэлгээнд хамрагдагчийн ажлын байран дахь урам зоригт байдлыг тодорхойлогч гол сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг илрүүлэхэд чиглэнэ.  Тухайн хүн ажлын орчинд урам зоригтой, сэдэлтэй байхад ямар төрлийн хүчин зүйлс илүү чухал нөлөөтэй болохыг тодорхойлоход зориулагдсан бөгөөд улмаар байгууллага тухайн хүнийг урамшуулах, дэмжих стратеги илүү оновчтой боловсруулахад туслах болно оо. 











1.1 СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛИЙН БҮЛЭГ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ 

Тайлбар: Тестийн энэ хэсэгт байгууллагын ажилтанууд  ажлын сэдэл, урам зоригт нөлөөлж буй гол хүчин зүйлсийг гурван үндсэн бүлгээр - нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл,  хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл, болон байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл гэж тодорхойлсон. 

Эдгээр гурван хүчин зүйл нь ажилтны дотоод ба гадаад урам зоригийн эх үүсвэр, ажлын орчны уур амьсгал, байгууллагын соёл болон хамтын ажиллагааны чанарыг цогцоор нь илэрхийлдэг болно. 

•	Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүн өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх, мэргэжлийн ур чадвараа дээшлүүлэх, шинэ мэдлэг эзэмших, ажил мэргэжлийн өсөлтөд хүрэх зэрэг дотоод хандлага, үнэт зүйлст тулгуурладаг.

•	Байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл нь байгууллагаас ажилтанд олгодог материаллаг болон сэтгэлзүйн дэмжлэг, ажлын орчны нөхцөл, урамшууллын бодлого, хөдөлмөрийн үр дүнг үнэлэх систем, удирдлагын дэмжлэг, итгэлцэл зэрэгтэй холбоотой. Байгууллагын дэмжлэг нь ажилтны сэтгэл ханамжийг нэмэгдүүлэх, ажлын орчинд тогтвортой байдал бий болгох, урт хугацааны үнэнч байдлыг хадгалах гол хүчин зүйл болдог.

•	Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл нь нийгмийн оролцоо, хамт олонтой харилцах харилцааны чанар, бусдад үзүүлэх нөлөө, мөн хамтын зорилгод хувь нэмэр оруулах хандлага зэргээр тодорхойлогдоно.  Өөрөөр хэлбэл, ажилтан бусдын дунд хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх, нийгэмд эерэг нөлөө үзүүлэх, багаар ажиллах, санаа бодлоо хуваалцах замаар байгууллагын амжилтад хувь нэмэр оруулах хүсэл тэмүүллээр сэдэлждэг.
 
ДҮГНЭЛТ  
Гурван хүчин зүйлийн нөлөөллийн харьцуулалт нь илт давуу ялгаагүй ч нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл (37%) хамгийн өндөр хувьтай гарсан байна. Энэ нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын хувьд нийгмийн орчин, хамтын ажиллагаа, бусдад нөлөөлөх боломж, санаа бодлоо хуваалцах зэрэг харилцааны хүчин зүйлс ажлын сэдэлд голлох нөлөө үзүүлж буйг харуулж байна.

1.2 ГОЛ СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛ 

Тайлбар : Тус хэсэгт сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийг тодорхойлох тестийн 15 үзүүлэлтээс чухам ямар үзүүлэлт нь тухайн байгууллагын ажиллагсддаг хамгийн гол нөлөө үзүүлэхүйц сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл болж буйг сэтгэл ханамжийн үзүүлэлтийн хамт тодорхойлсон болно .

•	Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл гэдэг нь ажилтныг тодорхой үйлдэл хийх, зорилгод хүрэхэд түлхэц болдог дотоод болон гадаад өдөөгч юм.

•	Сэтгэл ханамж нь тухайн ажилтны ажил, орчин, байгууллагын бодлого, удирдлагын хандлага зэргээс үүдэлтэй сэтгэлзүйн хариу үйлдэлийг хэлнэ. 




	

	



ДҮГНЭЛТ 

     Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл тодорхойлох тестийн үр дүнгээс хархад  карьер хөгжүүлэх боломж болон нийгмийн орчин нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын хувьд гол сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсээр илэрсэн байна. 
Энэ нь ажилтнуудын мэргэжлийн өсөлт, дэвшилтэд чиглэсэн хүлээлт, мөн хамт олонтой харилцах, нөлөөлөх, хамтын орчинд ажиллах хэрэгцээ нь тэдний ажлын урам зориг, оролцоонд голлон нөлөөлж байгааг илтгэнэ.Карьерийн хөгжил болон нийгмийн орчны хүчин зүйлс давхар сэдэлжүүлэгчээр илэрсэн нь байгууллага хүний хөгжлийг дэмжих бодлого, хамтын уур амьсгалыг бэхжүүлэх соёлыг стратегийн түвшинд анхаарах боломжийг харуулж байна.

1.3 СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛСИЙН ГРАФИК ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ

Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийг тодорхойлох тестийн үр дүнг доор харуулав. Хэмжсэн хүчин зүйл бүрийн хувьд дээд тод үзүүлэлт нь  сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл оноо, доод бүдэг үзүүлэлт нь сэтгэл ханамжийн оноог илэрхийлнэ.

3 бүлгийн сэдэлждэг хүчин зүйл болон сэтгэл ханамжийн үзүүлэлтийн тайлбар график 

2.1 СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛСИЙН ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ҮР ДҮН 

2.1.1 ХУВИЙН ХӨГЖЛИЙН СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛ

     Энэхүү хэсэг нь үнэлгээнд хамрагдагчийн хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс болон тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийн түвшнгийн үнэлгээ, дүгнэлтийг харуулав. Тухайн хувь хүн ажлын байран дээр өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх, амжилтад хүрэх, ур чадвараа ахиулахад чиглэсэн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг тодорхойлох, улмаар байгууллага болон хувь хүний хөгжлийн стратегийг оновчтой төлөвлөхөд дэмжлэг үзүүлэхэд оршино.

“Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин” нь тухайн хүний мэргэжлийнхээ хувьд өсөн дэвшихэд түлхэц болдог үнэт зүйлсийг ойлгодог. Ажлын байран дээр өсөж хөгжих, амжилтад хөтлөх тэдгээр үнэт зүйлст: 
•	Өөрийгөө сорих – шинэ сорилт, шаардлагыг даван туулах замаар өөрийн чадварыг баталах эрмэлзэл.
•	Магтаал, сайшаал хүртэх – бусдын хүлээн зөвшөөрөл, эерэг үнэлгээг хүлээх замаар урам зоригийг нэмэгдүүлэх 
•	Өрсөлдөх сэтгэл – бусадтай өрсөлдөж илүү сайн гүйцэтгэл үзүүлэх, амжилтад хүрэх эрмэлзэл.
•	Суралцах, эрмэлзэл – шинэ мэдлэг, ур чадварыг эзэмших, өөрийгөө тасралтгүй сайжруулах хүсэл тэмүүлэл.
•	Карьерийн өсөлт, дэвшил эрэлхийлэх – мэргэжлийн ахиц, манлайллын боломжийг ашиглан урт хугацааны амжилтыг бий болгох зорилго.

БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ДУНДАЖ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН ГРАФИК 

Хүснэгт 1 Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс ба сэтгэл ханамжийн  түвшингийн  график үзүүлэлт 

 Тайлбар : Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг тодорхойлох үнэлгээний хувийн хөгжлийн хүчин зүйлийн  үр дүнгээс хамгийн өндөр оноотой буюу тухайн байгууллагын үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын хувьд нөлөөлөхүйц сэдэл болж байгаа үзүүлэлтүүдийн үр дүнг доорх хүснэгтэд харуулсан болно. 
Хүснэгт 2 Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн сэдэл ба сэтгэл ханамж үзүүлэлтийн үр дүн 

Онооны үзүүлэлт	Тайлбар	Суралцах эрмэлзэл	Карьер хөгжүүлэх боломж


		Сэдэл	Сэтгэл ханамж	Сэдэл	Сэтгэл ханамж
4.5-5.9 оноо	Заримдаа сэдэлждэг 	24%	14%	14%	14%
6-7.4 оноо	Сэдэлждэг	38%	14%	31%	28%
7.5-8.9 оноо	Их сэдэлждэг  	14%	38%	34%	24%
9.0-10 оноо 	Маш их сэдэлждэг 	0%	21%	21%	17%


Тайлбар : Хувийн хөгжлийн хүчин зүйл бүлгээс хамгийн өндөр оноотой үзүүлэлтийн онооны тайлбар, сэдэл болон сэтгэл ханамжийн үзүүлэлтийн уялдаа тайлбар, цаашид хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжийг агуулсан болно. 

Үзүүлэлт 	Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо 	Сэтгэл ханамжийн оноо 	Уялдаа тайлбар 
Карьер хөгжүүлэх боломж	7.7	6.5	Карьерийн ахиц дэвшил, албан тушаалын өсөлт, ур чадварын үнэлгээг хамгийн хүчтэй сэдэл  болон илэрчээ. Гэвч сэтгэл ханамж харьцангуй доогуур байгаа нь байгууллага ажилтны хүлээлтэд нийцсэн карьер хөгжлийн бодит боломж, шат дараалсан өсөлт, дэмжлэгийн тогтолцоо сул байгааг харуулж байна. Өөрөөр хэлбэл, ажилтнууд карьер өсөлтийг чухалчилж байгаа ч бодит нөхцөл хангалтгүй байгаа учир “өндөр сэдэл – бага ханамж” бүсэд орж байна.

Суралцах хүсэл эрмэлзэл	5.9	7.1	Тус үзүүлэлтээр дунд түвшний сэдэлтэй боловч сэтгэл ханамж дунд түвшинд сайн байна. Ажилтнууд суралцах хэрэгцээг мэдэрч байгаа ч дотоод урам зориг сул, өөрөөр хэлбэл суралцах хүсэл нь байвч хэрэгжилтийн орчин, урамшуулал, сургалтын хүртээмж бүрэн хангалтгүй байна. Сэтгэл ханамж бага зэрэг өндөр байгаа нь байгууллага тодорхой хэмжээнд сургалтын боломж олгодог ч эдгээр нь ажилтны ур чадварын бодит өсөлтөд бүрэн хүрэлцэхгүй байгааг харуулж байна.

2.1.2 ХУВИЙН ХӨГЖЛИЙН СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛ, САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

Тус үр дүнгээс хархад  карьер хөгжүүлэх боломж болон суралцах эрмэлзэл гэсэн хоёр үзүүлэлт хамгийн өндөр оноотой гарсан нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын хувьд тасралтгүй суралцах ба мэргэжлийн ахиц дэвшил нь  чухал хүчин зүйл болж байна. 

Ажилтнуудын сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо өндөр, харин сэтгэл ханамж дунд түвшинд байгаа нь  
байгууллага “хөгжлийн үнэ цэнийг” зөв тодорхойлсон ч бодит хэрэгжилт, системийн түвшинд сул байгааг илтгэж байна. 

Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийн нөлөөг урт хугацаанд тогтвортой байлгахын тулд:
•	Хүний нөөцийн бодлого нь “карьерийн ахиц + тасралтгүй суралцах орчин”-ыг хослуулсан загвартай байх шаардлагатай. 
•	Сургалт, хөгжлийн хөтөлбөрүүдийг бодит гүйцэтгэл, өсөлттэй уялдуулах. 
•	Удирдлагын түвшинд “хөгжлийг дэмжих бодлого баримтлах нь чухал ач холбогдолтой юм. 

2.2 БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ЗҮГЭЭС СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛ

    Энэхүү хэсэг нь байгууллагаас ажилтанд үзүүлж буй сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс болон тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийн түвшингийн үнэлгээ, дүгнэлтийг харуулна. Тухайн хувь хүний ажлын урам зориг, гүйцэтгэл, байгууллагын үнэт зүйлтэй уялдсан байдалд сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс хэрхэн нөлөөлж байгаа болон сэтгэл ханамжийн уялдааг тодорхойлсон болно. 

     Байгууллагын зүгээс үзүүлэх сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс нь ажилтны хөдөлмөрийн үр дүн, ажлын орчны сэтгэл ханамж, урам зоригийг дэмжих зорилготой байгууллагын зүгээс олгож буй дэмжлэгийг илэрхийлдэг. 

Үүнд дараах үзүүлэлтүүд хамаарна:

•	Бие даан, чөлөөтэй ажиллах боломж – өөрийн шийдвэр гаргах, санаачилгыг хэрэгжүүлэх эрх чөлөөтэй байх байдал.
•	Цалин болон урамшууллын бодлого – шударга, тогтвортой, гүйцэтгэлд суурилсан хө rémuneration систем.
•	Эрүүл, тэнцвэртэй ажлын орчин – ажлын болон хувийн амьдралын тэнцвэр, сэтгэлзүйн болон бие махбодийн аюулгүй байдал.
•	Ажлын байрны тогтвортой байдал – байгууллагын урт хугацааны итгэлцэл, ажилтны ирээдүйн баталгааг хангах нөхцөл.
•	Идэвхтэй, хөдөлгөөнтэй байх боломж – ажлын уян хатан байдал, хөдөлгөөнтэй орчны дэмжлэг, шинэ сорилт хүлээн авах боломж.


БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ДУНДАЖ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН ГРАФИК 

Хүснэгт 2 Байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс ба сэтгэл ханамжийн  түвшингийн  график үзүүлэлт 
 

Тайлбар : Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг тодорхойлох үнэлгээний байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн  үр дүнгээс хамгийн өндөр оноотой буюу тухайн байгууллагын үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын хувьд нөлөөлөхүйц сэдэл болж буй үзүүлэлтүүдийн үр дүнг доорх хүснэгтэд харуулсан болно. 

Хүснэгт 2 Байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн сэдэл ба сэтгэл ханамж үзүүлэлтийн үр дүн 

Онооны үзүүлэлт 	Тайлбар	Бие даан чөлөөтэй ажиллах 	Эрүүл тэнцвэртэй байдал 

		Сэдэл	Сэтгэл ханамж	Сэдэл	Сэтгэл ханамж

4.5-5.9 оноо	Заримдаа сэдэлждэг 	31%	28%	24%	28%
6-7.4 оноо	Сэдэлждэг	21%	34%	10%	28%
7.5-8.9 оноо	Их сэдэлждэг  	3%	14%	3%	21%
9.0-10 оноо 	Маш их сэдэлждэг 	31%	28%	24%	28%


Байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл бүлгээс хамгийн өндөр оноотой үзүүлэлтийн онооны тайлбар, сэдэл болон сэтгэл ханамжийн үзүүлэлтийн уялдаа тайлбар, цаашид хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжийг агуулсан болно. 

Үзүүлэлт 	Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо 	Сэтгэл ханамжийн оноо 	Уялдаа тайлбар 
Бие даан чөлөөтэй ажиллах	5.8	6.8	Ажилтнууд ажлын байранд чөлөөтэй амар ажиллах нөхцөлийг харьцангуй мэдэрч байгаа ч түүнийг бүрэн идэвхжүүлэх хэмжээнд хүрээгүй байна. Сэтгэл ханамж илүү өндөр байгаа нь орчны уур амьсгал таатай боловч дотоод урам зориг сул байгааг харуулж байна. 

Эрүүл тэнцвэртэй байх	5.3	7.1	Ажилтнууд ажил–амьдралын тэнцвэрт сэтгэл ханамжтай байгаа ч энэ хүчин зүйл ажлын урам зоригийг идэвхжүүлэх гол шалтгаан болж чадахгүй байгаа харагдаж байна. Сэтгэл ханамж өндөр боловч сэдэл бага төвшинд байна. 


2.2.2 БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ЗҮГЭЭС  СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛС, САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

Тус үр дүнгээс хархад  бие даан чөлөөтэй ажиллах боломж  болон эрүүл тэнцвэртэй байх гэсэн хоёр үзүүлэлт хамгийн өндөр оноотой гарсан нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын хувьд ажлын орчин сэтгэл зүйн аюулгүй байдлыг хангах  хэрэгцээ ажиглагдаж буйг илтгэнэ. 

Байгууллагын ажилтнуудын сэтгэл ханамж өндөр байх нь эерэг боловч, энэ нь сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлтэй эн тэнцэхгүй. Сэдэл нь өсөлт, хувь нэмэр, үнэ цэнийг мэдрэх хэрэгцээнээс эхэлдэг гэж үздэг. 
Иймд байгууллага ажилтны сэтгэл ханамжийг “суурь” гэж авч үзээд, түүн дээр сэдэлжүүлэх тогтолцоог системтэйгээр хөгжүүлэх шаардлага ажиглагдаж байна. Үүний тулд: 

•	Сэтгэл ханамжаас сэдэлрүү шилжих боломжийг хангаж өгөх, сэтгэл ханамжийн суурийг ашиглан ажилтны дотоод урам зориг, оролцоог идэвхжүүлэх стратеги хэрэгжүүлэх , эрэлхийлэх
•	Ажил–амьдралын тэнцвэрийг сэдэлжүүлэх хүчин зүйл болгон ашиглахын тулд эрүүл, уян хатан ажлын орчныг байгууллагын урамшууллын бодлоготой уялдуулах.
•	Хүний нөөцийн хөгжлийн нэгдсэн бодлого хэрэгжүүлэх, сургалт, карьер төлөвлөлт, гүйцэтгэлийн үнэлгээг нэгтгэсэн сэдэлжүүлэх хөтөлбөр хэрэгжүүлэх арга замуудыг зөвлөж байна. 



2.3.1 НИЙГМИЙН ЗҮГЭЭС СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛС

        Энэхүү хэсэг нь үнэлгээнд хамрагдагчийн нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс болон тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийн түвшин, дүгнэлт, тайлбарыг харуулна. Тухайн хувь хүн нийгмийн орчин, бусадтай харилцах харилцаанаас хэрхэн урам зориг авч, нийгмийн хүчин зүйлүүд хувь хүний  ажлын урам зоригт  үзүүлэх нөлөөг  тодорхойлно. 

    Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс нь хувь хүний нийгмийн оролцоо, харилцааны чанар, бусдад үзүүлэх нөлөөлөл, хамтын зорилгод хувь нэмэр оруулах хүсэл эрмэлзлийг илэрхийлдэг. Эдгээр нь тухайн хүний нийгмийн дотно байдал, харилцааны хэрэгцээ, хамтын ажиллагааны чиг баримжааг тодорхойлход нөлөөлдөг  үнэт зүйлсийг хамруулж авч үздэг. 
Үүнд дараах үзүүлэлтүүд хамаарна:

•	Нийгмийн орчин – багийн уур амьсгал, харилцааны таатай орчныг эрхэмлэн, бусадтай хамтран ажиллах сонирхол.
•	Санаагаа хуваалцах – өөрийн үзэл бодол, санал санаачилгыг бусадтай нээлттэй хуваалцах, хамтын шийдэлд хувь нэмэр оруулах эрмэлзэл.
•	Нөлөөлөл үзүүлэх – бусдын сэтгэл, хандлага, зан төлөвт эерэг өөрчлөлт бий болгох замаар нийгмийн орчин, бусдад нөлөөлөх хүсэл.
•	Бусдыг хөгжүүлэх – хамт олны гишүүдийн өсөлт, суралцах боломжийг дэмжих, чиглүүлэх, туршлагаа бусадтай  хуваалцах сонирхол.
•	Олон нийтэд үйлчлэх – нийгэм, хамт олны сайн сайхны төлөө хувь нэмэр оруулах, нийгмийн хариуцлагатай үйл ажиллагаанд оролцох хандлага гэх зэрэг болно. 



БАЙГУУЛЛАГЫН ДУНДАЖ ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТИЙН ГРАФИК 

Хүснэгт 4  Нийгмийн зүгээс  сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс бүлгийн сэдэл ба сэтгэл ханамжийн  түвшин график
 

Тайлбар : Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг тодорхойлох үнэлгээний нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн  үр дүнгээс хамгийн өндөр оноотой буюу тухайн байгууллагын үнэлгээнд хамрагдагсадын хувьд нөлөөлөхүйц сэдэл болж буй үзүүлэлтүүдийн үр дүнг доорх хүснэгтэд харуулсан болно.

Хүснэгт 5 Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл бүлгийн сэдэл ба сэтгэл ханамж үзүүлэлтийн тоон үр дүн 

Онооны үзүүлэлт 	Тайлбар	Нийгмийн орчин 	Санаагаа хуваалцах  


		Сэдэл	Сэтгэл ханамж

	Сэдэл	Сэтгэл ханамж
4.5-5.9 оноо	Заримдаа сэдэлждэг 	10%	17%	10%	17%
6-7.4 оноо	Сэдэлждэг	34%	24%	24%	21%
7.5-8.9 оноо	Их сэдэлждэг  	31%	31%	21%	28%
9.0-10 оноо 	Маш их сэдэлждэг 	3%	21%	3%	28%


Тайлбар : Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл бүлгээс хамгийн өндөр оноотой үзүүлэлтийн онооны тайлбар, сэдэл болон сэтгэл ханамжийн үзүүлэлтийн уялдаа тайлбар, цаашид хөгжүүлэх зөвлөмжийг агуулсан болно. 

Үзүүлэлт 	Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо 	Сэтгэл ханамжийн оноо 	Уялдаа тайлбар 
Нийгмийн орчны нөлөөлөл	6.3	7.1	 Ажилтнууд байгууллагын хамт олны уур амьсгал, харилцааг эерэгээр мэдэрч, орчны хувьд сэтгэл ханамжтай байгаа боловч энэ уур амьсгал тэдний дотоод сэдлийг бүрэн өдөөж чадахгүй байгааг харуулж байна. Нийгмийн орчныг тогтвортой, найрсаг гэж үзэж байгаа ч хамтын зорилгын төлөө санаачилгатай оролцох урам зориг сул байна.

Санаагаа хуваалцах боломж	5.6	7.2	Санаагаа илэрхийлэх, санал бодлоо хэлэх орчин сэтгэл ханамжийн хувьд эерэг, аюулгүй гэж үзэж байгаа боловч санаачилга бодитоор хэрэгжих, үнэлэгдэх итгэл сул байгааг илтгэж байна. 




2.3.2 НИЙГМИЙН ЗҮГЭЭС  СЭДЭЛЖҮҮЛЭГЧ ХҮЧИН ЗҮЙЛС, САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 

Тус үр дүнгээс хархад  нийгмийн орчны нөлөөлөл болон санаагаа хуваалцах боломж гэсэн хоёр үзүүлэлт хамгийн өндөр оноотой гарсан нь байгууллагын ажилтнуудын хувьд нийгмийн орчин  уур амьсгал ба харилцааны орчин зэрэгт сэтгэл ханамжтай байгаа ч эдгээр хүчин зүйлс нь сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл болж бүрэн идэвхийг өдөөж чадахгүй байна.  

Сэтгэл ханамж болон сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн зөрүүтэй байдал нь тус байгууллага нь орчны таатай байдлыг бий болгосон боловч хувь хүний оролцоог идэвхжүүлэх шатандаа хангалтгүй байгааг илтгэнэ. Иймээс байгууллагын стратегийн зорилго нь “Сэтгэл ханамжийг хадгалах + Сэдлийг нэмэгдүүлэх” гэсэн хос чиглэлд төвлөрөх шаардлагатай байна.  Үүний тулд : 

•	Байгууллага хамт олны оролцоог идэвхжүүлэх сэтгэл ханамжаас сэдэлрүү шилжих боломжийг хангаж өгөх, сэтгэл ханамжийн суурийг ашиглан ажилтны  урам зориг, оролцоог идэвхжүүлэх стратеги хэрэгжүүлэх, эрэлхийлэх
•	Ажилтны санаачлагыг бодитоор хэрэгжүүлэх дэмжлэгийн тогтолцоог бий болгох, 
•	Сонсох, оролцуулах, урамшуулах манлайллыг төлөвшүүлэх, хөгжлийн нэгдсэн бодлого хэрэгжүүлэх, сургалт, үнэлгээг нэгтгэсэн  хөтөлбөр хэрэгжүүлэх арга замуудыг зөвлөж байна. 


НЭГДСЭН ТАЙЛАНГЫН ДҮГНЭЛТ 

“Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК” хамрагдсан уг үнэлгээний хүрээнд байгууллагын ажилтнуудын юунаас сэдэл авч, хэрхэн бүтээмжтэй ажиллах болон өөрсдийн одоогын нөхцөл байдлын сэтгэл ханамжын түвшинг тодорхойлсон болно. 
Тайланд нь ажилтнуудын хөгжих боломж өндөртэй нөхцөл,  шаардлагатай талуудыг танин мэдэж, цаашдын сургалт, хүний нөөцийн  бодлого боловсруулахад чиглэж байна.
Үнэлгээний нэгдсэн дүгнэлтийн хувьд :
•	Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл 
•	Байгууллагын зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл
•	Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс 3 бүлэг үзүүлэлтээр сэдэл болон сэтгэл ханамжийн түвшинг тодорхойлсон болно.

Эрдэнэс Монгол ХХК нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс хамгийн өндөр түвшинд илэрсэн байна. Энэ нь ажилтнуудын хувьд хамт олонтойгоо үр дүнтэй харилцах, бусдад нөлөөлөх, бусдыг хөгжүүлэх, олон нийтийн үйл ажиллагаанд оролцож эерэг нөлөө үзүүлэх нь ажлын урам зоригт чухал  нөлөөтэй болохыг харуулж байна. 

 Сэтгэл ханамж дунд түвшинд байгаагаар илэрсэн нь ажлын байрны баталгаат байдал, магтаал сайшаал хүртэх, идэвхтэй хөдөлгөөн зэрэг нь  тодорхой хэмжээнд сайжрах шаардлагатай байгааг илтгэнэ. 

Карьерийн ахиц дэвшил, бусдад нөлөөлөх боломж нийгмийн орчин, бие даан ажиллах, суралцах эрмэлзэл зэрэг хүчин зүйлс нь сэдэлжүүлэгчийн эх сурвалж болж байна. Эдгээр хэрэгцээ, хүсэл эрмэлзэлд тулгуурлан ажилтны урт хугацааны тогтвортой байдал, гүйцэтгэл, оролцооны идэвхэд эергэ нөлөө үзүүлж болно. 

Байгууллагын сэтгэл ханамжийн түвшинг сэдэлжүүлэх хүчин зүйлийн хөшүүрэг болгон ашиглах шаардлагахын тулд  гурван үндсэн чиглэлд анхаарах нь зүйтэй. Үүнд: 

•	Нэгдүгээрт, сэтгэл ханамжийг хадгалангаа ажилтны хувь нэмэр, санаачилгыг урамшуулах дотоод урамшууллын системийг хөгжүүлэх;
•	Хоёрдугаарт, карьер хөгжлийн бодит дэмжлэг, сургалт хөгжлийн тогтолцоог сайжруулах замаар хүлээлт ба бодит нөхцөлийн зөрүүг арилгах;
•	Гуравдугаарт, хамт олны уур амьсгал, харилцааны итгэлцлийг бүтээлч оролцоотой холбох, өөрөөр хэлбэл “сэтгэл ханамжаас сэдэлжүүлэх хүчин зүйлрүү шилжих” соёлыг төлөвшүүлэх шаардлагатай.
Ажилтнуудын сэтгэл ханамж өндөр, сэдэл дунд түвшинд байгаа үед богино хугацаанд тогтвортой байдлыг хадгалах ч урт хугацаанд бүтээмж, идэвхийг сулруулах эрсдэлтэй. Тиймээс байгууллагын хөгжлийн дараагийн шат нь “Сэтгэл ханамж → Сэдэл → Гүйцэтгэл → Бүтээмж” гэсэн дарааллыг системтэй хэрэгжүүлэх, сэтгэл ханамжийг идэвхжүүлэлтэд шилжүүлэх стратеги боловсруулахад чиглэх нь зүйтэй юм.

САЙЖРУУЛАХ ЗӨВЛӨМЖ 
Дээрх тайлангын үр дүнд үндэслэн хэд хэдэн сайжруулах зөвлөмжийг хүргэж байна. Үүнд: 
•	“Сэтгэл ханамж → Сэдэл → Гүйцэтгэл → Бүтээмж буюу үр дүн” шаталсан хөгжлийн загвараар төлөвлөх буюу Ажилтны санал, санаачилгыг үр дүнтэй хэрэгжүүлэх “feedback-to-action” механизмыг бий болгож, санаачилга гаргасан ажилтныг байгууллагын түвшинд урамшуулах.
•	Бие даасан шийдвэр гаргах боломж, үүргийн хариуцлагыг тэнцвэртэй хуваарилснаар ажилтнуудын өөрийгөө илэрхийлэх, санаачилга гаргах, урам зоригтой ажиллах нөхцөлийг бүрдүүлэх.
•	Ажилтны карьерийн ахиц дэвшлийн ил тод зам, ур чадварын шалгуур, хөгжлийн үе шаттай төлөвлөгөөг боловсруулж хэрэгжүүлэх.
•	Гүйцэтгэлд суурилсан урамшууллын тогтолцоо, менторшип хөтөлбөр, карьер зөвлөгөөний уулзалт зэргийг тогтмолжуулах.
•	Сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдлыг хангах well-being хөтөлбөр, стрессийн менежмент, сэтгэлзүйн дэмжлэгийн үйлчилгээ бий болгох.
•	Уян хатан ажлын зохион байгуулалт, ажлын ачааллын зохицуулалтаар дамжуулан ажил–амьдралын тэнцвэрийг хадгалах.


ХӨГЖҮҮЛЭХ СУРГАЛТЫН ЧИГЛЭЛ
№	Сургалтын чиглэл 	Гол сэдэв 	Хүлээгдэж буй үр дүн 

1	Удирдлагын ба байгууллагын соёл	Хамтын ажиллагаа ба шийдвэр гаргалтын ур чадвар 
Хүн төвтэй харилцааны манлайлал	Удирдлагын хандлага сайжирч, багийн итгэлцэл, харилцааны соёл төлөвшинө.
2	Сэдэлжүүлэлт ба хөгжил	Хүлээн зөвшөөрөх харилцаа, урамшууллын сэтгэлзүй 
Ажилтны оролцоог дэмжих харилцааны ур чадвар 
Гүйцэтгэлд суурилсан үнэлгээ, урамшууллын арга зүй	Сэтгэл ханамж ба сэдэлжүүлэлт уялдан, ажилтны оролцоо, урам зориг нэмэгдэнэ.
3	Хувь хүний хөгжил ба сэтгэл зүйн аюулгүй орчин	Өөрийгөө танин мэдэх ба дотоод урам зоригийг хөгжүүлэх 
Стрессийн менежмент ба сэтгэлзүйн уян хатан байдал 
Эерэг сэтгэлгээ ба дасан зохицох чадвар 
Эмпати ба харилцааны оюун ухаан (emotional intelligence)	Ажилтнуудын сэтгэлзүйн тогтвортой байдал нэмэгдэж, стрессийн удирдлага сайжирна.
4	Ажил амьдралын тэнцвэр Well being	Well-being хандлага ба эрүүл байгууллагын соёл 
Сэтгэлзүйн эрүүл мэндийг хамгаалах арга 
Уян хатан ажиллах хэв маяг 
Ажил–амьдралын тэнцвэрийг хадгалах дадал
	Сэтгэл ханамж, бүтээмж, ажилтны урт хугацааны тогтвортой байдал нэмэгдэнэ.
5	Хамтын оролцоо ба инноваци	Санаачилга ба бүтээлч сэтгэлгээний ур чадвар 
Зөрчлийг шийдвэрлэх ба харилцааны эв дүй 
Багийн ажлын харилцаа, итгэлцэл ба хамтын шийдвэр гаргалт  Инноваци ба асуудал шийдвэрлэх арга зүй
Хамтын оролцоо идэвхжиж, бүтээлч санаачилга, хамтын шийдвэрийн чанар дээшилнэ.


ТАЙЛАН
Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ






















 
Агуулга
1.	ЕРӨНХИЙ ТАНИЛЦУУЛГА	3
2.	ЕРӨНХИЙ ҮР ДҮН	5
3.	ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ҮР ДҮН	6





















Central Test-ийн тусгайлан боловсруулсан Motivation+ үнэлгээ болон Central Test-ийн лого нь ОУ-ын оюуны өмчийн эрхээр хамгаалагдсан болно. Тиймээс Central Test бичгээр зөвшөөрөл олгоогүй тохиолдолд тус үнэлгээг хуулбарлах, өөрчлөх, засварлахыг хориглоно.
Central Test - Empowering Talent © 2024 Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.
1 – ЕРӨНХИЙ ТАНИЛЦУУЛГА
MOTIVATION+ нь Central Test-ээс хувь хүний хийж буй ажил мэргэжилдээ урам зориг/сэдэлжүүлэлт авах хүчин зүйлсийг хэмжихэд зориулагдан боловсруулсан үнэлгээ юм.
Энэхүү тайлан нь тестийн үр дүнд үндэслэсэн дүгнэлт болно. Тайланг хэрхэн тайлж унших вэ:
-	Зөв эсвэл буруу үнэт зүйл, урам зориг өгөх зүйл гэж байхгүйтэй адил энэхүү тайланд зөв, буруу, сайн, муу үр дүн гэж байхгүй болно.
-	Үр дүнгүүдийг өөр хооронд нь хамаатуулж ойлгох ба тухайн үнэлгээг өгч буй хүнийг сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлүүдийг чухал байдлаар эрэмбэлсэн хэмжүүр болгон ашиглана. Нэг хүчин зүйл дээр өндөр оноотой гарсан нь (Жишээ нь: Цалин урамшуулал) тухайн хүнийг сэдэлжүүлэх цор ганц зүйл гэсэн үг биш бөгөөд бусад хүчин зүйлсийг ч мөн харгалзан үзэх хэрэгтэй. Энэ нь бага оноотой сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлсийг ч бодолцож үзэх хэрэгтэй гэсэн санаа юм.
-	Тайланг зөв тайлж уншихын тулд тус үнэлгээний зорилгыг болон хэмжигдэж буй хүчин зүйл бүрийн оновчтой утгыг ойлгосон байх хэрэгтэй. Хэрэв үр дүнг илүү гүн ойлгохыг хүсвэл сэтгэл зүйч эсвэл бэлтгэгдсэн зөвлөх/мэргэжилтэнд хандахыг зөвлөж байна.

-	Энэхүү тайлан нь хувь хүний нууцлалтай мэдээлэл бөгөөд тухайн хүний өөрийн зөвшөөрөлгүйгээр гуравдагч этгээдэд задруулж болохгүй.

MOTIVATION+
Энэхүү үнэлгээ нь ажлын байран дах гол 15 сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйл болон тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийг хэмжинэ. Эдгээр 15 хүчин зүйлүүд нь 3 бүлэг сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлст хуваагдаж байгааг доор харууллаа.
2 – ЕРӨНХИЙ ҮР ДҮН

Тайлангийн энэ хэсэг үнэлгээнд хамрагдагчийн хувьд аль сэдэлжүүлэгчид нь ажлын байран дах урам зоригтой байдалд чухал үүрэг гүйцэтгэдэг болохыг (Гол сэдэлжүүлэгчид), мөн тухайн хүний сэтгэл ханамж өндөр байвал зохих сэдэлжүүлэгчдийг (Туслах сэдэлжүүлэгчид) харуулж өгнө.
Ажлын байран дээр тухайн хүн урам зоригтой байхад ямар сэдэлжүүлэгчид хэрэгтэйг, мөн чухал биш байсан ч аль сэдэлжүүлэгч нь тухайн хүний урам зоригтой байдалд хүчтэй нөлөө үзүүлэх вэ гэдгийг тодорхойлоход хэрэгтэй.
Доорх тоон утга нь сэдэлжүүлэгчдийн чухал байдлын дарааллыг онооных нь дагуу жагсаан харуулсан болно.
Гол сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс:

НИЙГМИЙН ОРЧИН	БУСДЫГ ХӨГЖҮҮЛЭХ	САНААГАА ХУВААЛЦАХ

Туслах сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс:

ЭРҮҮЛ ТЭНЦВЭРТЭЙ БАЙДАЛ	ОЛОН НИЙТЭД ҮЙЛЧЛЭХ	ӨӨРИЙН ХЯЗГААРЫГ СОРИХ
3 – График үзүүлэлт
Туршилтын үр дүнгийн дүрслэлийг доор харуулав. Хэмжсэн хүчин зүйл бүрийн хувьд дээд, бараан зураас нь сэдэл өгөх оноог илэрхийлнэ. Доод, хөнгөн бар нь сэтгэл ханамжийн оноог илэрхийлнэ.
МАГТААЛ САЙШААЛ ӨӨРИЙН
ХЯЗГААРЫГ СОРИХ СУРАЛЦАХ ЭРМЭЛЗЭЛ КАРЬЕР ХӨГЖҮҮЛЭХ
ӨРСӨЛДӨӨН
ШИЛЖИЛТ ХӨДӨЛГӨӨН
ЦАЛИН УРАМШУУЛАЛ
БИЕ ДААН ЧӨЛӨӨТЭЙ АЖИЛЛАХ ОРЧИН
БАТАЛГААТ БАЙДАЛ ЭРҮҮЛ ТЭНЦВЭРТЭЙ
НИЙГМИЙН ОРЧИН
ОЛОН НИЙТЭД ҮЙЛЧЛЭХ
БУСДЫГ ХӨГЖҮҮЛЭХ
НӨЛӨӨЛӨЛ
САНААГАА ХУВААЛЦАХ

0	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10
 
3 – ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ҮР ДҮН
Энэхүү хэсэгт тухайн хүний “Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс” бүлгийн сэдэлжүүлэгчид, тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийн онооны тайлбар дүгнэлтүүдийг хүчин зүйл тус бүр дээр дэлгэрэнгүй харуулсан болно.

“Хувийн хөгжлийн сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс” бүлгийг тухайн хүний мэргэжлийнхээ хувьд өсөн дэвшихэд түлхэц болдог үнэт зүйлстэй холбож ойлгодог. Ажлын байран дээр өсөж хөгжих, амжилтад хөтлөх тэдгээр үнэт зүйлст: Өөрийн хязгаараас давах, Магтаал сайшаал, Өрсөлдөөн, Суралцах эрмэлзэл, Карьер хөгжүүлэх боломж зэрэг орно.
Анхаарах: Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо өндөр боловч сэтгэл ханамжийн оноо бага байгаа тохиолдолд зөвлөгөө тайлбар харагдана.
Магтаал сайшаалаар сэдэлждэг хүмүүс өөрийн гүйцэтгэлийн чанар, үр дүнг удирдлага болон хамт олноороо тогтмол үнэлүүлэх сонирхолтой байдаг. Ажлаа ямар түвшинд гүйцэтгэж байгаагаа болон бусад хүн хэрхэн хүлээн авч байгааг мэдэх нь тэднийг хариуцсан ажилдаа урам зоригтой байж хийх ёстой зүйлээ хийж байгааг нь мэдрүүлдэг.
Энэхүү үзүүлэлтээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс өөрийн чадамжийн хязгаараа давах, сорих боломжуудад дуртай байдаг. Хийж буй ажил нь тэднийг тухтай бүсээсээ гарч сорилттой тулгарахад түлхэц үзүүлдэг байх үед илүү сэдэлждэг.
Энэхүү үзүүлэлт нь ажлын байран дээрээ шинэ мэдлэг чадвар олж авснаар сэдэлждэг байх үзүүлэлт юм. Энэ хүчин зүйлээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс мэдлэгийн хүрээг тэлэх шинэ зүйлс сурах ажлуудад дуртай байдаг. Суралцах хүсэл нь хангагдах боломжтой нөхцөлд цэнэглэгдэж байдаг хүмүүс юм.
Карьер хөгжүүлэх боломжоор сэдэлждэг хүмүүс карьерын шат ахих, тушаал дэвших боломжуудыг эрэлхийлж байдаг. Тиймээс ч ажлын газар нь эдгээр боломжуудыг олгож байгаа үед илүү урам зоригтой байдаг.

Өрсөлдөөнөөр сэдэлждэг хүмүүсийн хувьд бусдаас ялгарч илүү байх боломжийг олгодог орчинд илүү өдөөгдөж сэдэлждэг. Тэд ямар нэг зорилгод хүрэхийн төлөөх нөхөрсөг өрсөлдөөнийг дэмждэг ажлын байранд урам зоригтой байх болно.




 
 
Энэхүү хэсэгт тухайн хүний “Орчны зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс” бүлгийн сэдэлжүүлэгчид, тэдгээрийн
сэтгэл ханамжийн онооны тайлбар дүгнэлтүүдийг хүчин зүйл тус бүр дээр дэлгэрэнгүй харуулсан болно.
“Орчны зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс” бүлэг нь байгууллагаас тухайн хүнд олгож буй ‘Бие даан чөлөөтэй ажиллах орчин’, ’Цалин урамшуулал’, ’Эрүүл тэнцвэртэй байдал’, ’Баталгаат байдал’, ’Шилжилт хөдөлгөөн’ гэх зэрэг гадаад сэдэлжүүлэгчдийг хамарч үздэг. Эдгээр үзүүлэлтүүд тухайн хүний гүйцэтгэлд нэмэлтээр нөлөөлдөг бас нэг төрлийн гаднаас нөлөөлөгч (шагнал урамшуулал) гэж тодорхойлогддог.
Анхаарах: Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо бага, сэтгэл ханамжийн оноо ч мөн бага байгаа тохиолдолд зөвлөгөө тайлбар харагдах ба тухайн хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний ажлын идэвхэд мэдэгдэхүйц нөлөө үзүүлдэггүйг илтгэнэ.
Шилжилт хөдөлгөөнөөр сэдэлждэг төрлийн хүмүүс ажлын ихэнх цагаа ширээний ард сууж өнгөрөөхөөс илүүтэй ийш тийш явж хөдөлгөөнтэй байхыг шаарддаг ажилд дуртай байдаг. Албан өрөөнөөс тогтмол гарч явж ажил гүйцэтгэдэг байх нь тэдэнд хийж буй ажилдаа эрч хүч, урам зоригтой байх нөхцөлийг бүрдүүлдэг.
Энэхүү үзүүлэлтээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс өндөр цалинтай, бусад материаллаг шагнал, нэмэлттэй ажлуудаар урамшиж хөглөгддөг. Хийж буй ажилдаа урам зоригтой байхад нь бонус, нэмэлт урамшуулал маш чухал үүрэг гүйцэтгэдэг.
Энэхүү үзүүлэлтээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс ажиллах хэв маягтаа илүү ардчилсан, чөлөөтэй ажлын орчныг эрхэмлэдэг. Байгууллага тань хэрхэн ажиллаж, даалгавраа яаж гүйцэтгэхээ бие даан шийдвэрлэх уян хатан нөхцөлийг бүрдүүлсэн байхад илүү урам зоригтой, идэвхтэй байдаг.

Энэхүү үзүүлэлтээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс урт хугацааны, тогтвортой, ойрын хугацаанд гэнэт өөрчлөгдөөд
байхааргүй баталгаатай ажлын байранд илүү дуртай байдаг. Энэ нөхцөл хангагдаж тухайн байгууллагадаа урт хугацаанд ажиллах боломжтой гэдгийг мэдэж байгаа тохиолдолд ажилдаа урам зориг эрч хүчтэй байх нь бий.




Мотиваци (1.3/10)
Сэтгэл ханамж (10/10)
Таны хариултаас харахад баталгаат байдал танд төдийлөн чухал хүчин зүйл санагддаггүй. Ажлын байрны сонголт хийхэд тань тогтвортой, баталгаатай хөдөлмөрийн гэрээ нөлөөлөгч хүчин зүйл болж чадахгүй байх талтай. Тиймээс ч ойрын ирээдүйн баталгааг үүсгэх албан тушаал таны ажлын урам зоригтой байдалд нөлөөлөх нь ховор.
Сэтгэл ханамж: Одоогийн ажлын байрны баталгаат байдалдаа та сэтгэл хангалуун байдаг. Ажлын байрандаа урт хугацаандаа баталгаатай байх нөхцөл бүрдсэн байгаа нь танд таатай санагддаг.
Энэ хүчин зүйл бол ажиллаж буй байгууллага нь тухайн хүний эрүүл тэнцвэртэй байдлыг чухалчилдаг байх үед сэдэлждэг байдлыг илтгэдэг. Ажил амьдралын тэнцвэртэй байдал зэрэг нь тэдэнд чухал бөгөөд энэхүү ажил мэргэжлийн эрүүл аюулгүй байдлыг ажил олгогч нь хүндэтгэдэг байх үед илүү хөглөгдөж ажилладаг.
Энэхүү хэсэгт тухайн хүний “Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс” бүлгийн сэдэлжүүлэгчид, тэдгээрийн сэтгэл ханамжийн онооны тайлбар дүгнэлтүүдийг хүчин зүйл тус бүр дээр дэлгэрэнгүй харуулсан болно.
“Нийгмийн зүгээс сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлс” бүлэг нь тухайн хүний нийгмийн хүрээлэл, орчинтой хамаатай үнэт зүйлсийг хамруулж авч үздэг. ‘Нийгмийн орчин’, ’Санаагаа хуваалцах’, ’Нөлөөлөл’, ’Бусдыг хөгжүүлэх’, ’Олон нийтэд үйлчлэх’ гэх хүчин зүйлүүдээс бүрдэх үнэт зүйлүүд тухайн хүнд ажлын байран дээрх нийгмийн харилцаагаа сайжруулж бусдад тусалж дэмжих боломжийг олгодог.
Анхаарах: Сэдэлжүүлэгч хүчин зүйлийн оноо бага, сэтгэл ханамжийн оноо ч мөн бага байгаа тохиолдолд зөвлөгөө тайлбар харагдах ба тухайн хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний ажлын идэвхэд мэдэгдэхүйц нөлөө үзүүлдэггүйг илтгэнэ.
Нийгмийн хүрээлэн буй орчноос сэдэлждэг хүмүүс нь хамтран ажиллагчдадаа итгэж найдаж болдог нөхөрсөг ажлын орчныг үнэлдэг. Бусадтайгаа хамтран ажиллах нь байгууллагын дотоод эв нэгдэлд чухал нөлөөтэй гэж үздэг. Тийм орчныг эрхэмлэдэг байгууллагад ажиллах нь тэдний ажилдаа хөглөгдөж, урам зоригтой байх нөхцөлийг бүрдүүлдэг.



Олон нийтэд үйлчилж сэдэлждэг хүмүүст ажлаараа дамжуулан бусдад туслах нь маш чухал зүйл байдаг. Бусдад хэрэгтэй ажилд хувь нэмрээ оруулж байгаагаа мэдэж байгаа үедээ илүү хөглөгдөж ажилладаг.
Мотиваци (6.9/10)
Сэтгэл ханамж (10/10)	
Нийгэмдээ ашиг тустай байх нь таныг сэдэлжүүлдэг чухал хүчин зүйлсийн нэг болох нь харагдаж байна. Нийгэмдээ хэрэгтэй бусдад тустай ажил хийх боломжтой байх нь таныг улам их эрч хүчтэй, урам зоригтой болгодог. Бусдын сайн сайхны төлөө хувь нэмрээ оруулдаг байх боломжууд таны ажил мэргэжлийн сонголтод ч нөлөөлөх талтай.
Сэтгэл ханамж: Одоогийн ажлын байран дээр бусдад үйлчилж тусалж буй хэмжээндээ сэтгэл хангалуун байдаг. Гүйцэтгэж буй ажил мэргэжлээрээ бусдын сайн сайхны төлөө зүтгэж байгаадаа аз жаргалтай байдаг.
Энэхүү үзүүлэлтээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс өөрийн мэдлэг чадвараа бусдад зааж сургах боломжтой нөхцөлд илүү хөглөгддөг. Тэд туршлага, мэдлэгээ бусдад түгээх нөхцөлийг эрхэмлэдэг.
Нөлөөллөөр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс өөрсдийн оролцоогоор ажлын үр дүнд нөлөөлөхүйц чухал шийдвэр гаргадаг байх боломж нөхцөлд дуртай байдаг. Тиймдээ ч төсөл хөтөлбөрт нөлөөлөх чухал шийдвэр гаргалтад жинтэй санал оруулж буй үедээ илүүтэй хөглөгддөг.
Энэхүү үнэт зүйлээр сэдэлждэг хүмүүс өөрийн санаа бодол нь үнэлэгддэг, сонсогддог орчинд илүү хөглөгдөж ажилладаг. Тэдний санал хүсэлтэд анхаарлаа хандуулсан, бодол сэтгэгдлээ илэрхийлэхийг дэмжсэн орчинд сэдэлждэг.


ТАЙЛАН
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээ





















 

АГУУЛГА
1.	ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТҮҮД
2.	ГРАФИК
3.	ТАЙЛБАР, ЗӨВЛӨМЖ
4.	ЕРӨНХИЙ ТОДОРХОЙЛОЛТ





















Central Test-ийн тусгайлан боловсруулсан Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээ болон Central Test-ийн лого нь ОУ-ын оюуны өмчийн эрхээр хамгаалагдсан болно. Тиймээс Central Test бичгээр зөвшөөрөл олгоогүй тохиолдолд тус үнэлгээг хуулбарлах, өөрчлөх, засварлахыг хориглоно.
Central Test - Empowering Talent ©2024 Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.
1 - ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ
Үнэлгээний хүчин төгөлдөр байдал
Энэхүү шалгуур үзүүлэлт нь хувь хүний сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн талаар дэлгэрэнгүй мэдээлэл өгөх юм.
Үнэлгээнд хариулахдаа олон нийтийн таашаалд нийцүүлж хариулсан эсэхэд тавигдах шалгуур онооны
зөвшөөрөгдөх дундаж оноо нь 4.76 байна.
Хэрэв энэхүү дундаж оноо нь 6.86 болон түүнээс дээш гарвал хувь хүн олонд таашаагдах зорилгоор хариулсан буюу өөрийнхөө тухай эерэг сэтгэгдэл төрүүлэх хариултуудыг зориуд эсвэл санаандгүй байдлаар сонгосныг илтгэдэг.

Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө удирдах оюуны чадамжийн итгэлцүүр оноо
 
2 - ГРАФИК
Бусдад урам зориг өгөх чадвар (9.2)
Ялгаатай байдалд зохицох чадвар (8.3)
Ухаалаг эв дүйтэй байх чадвар (4.6)
Бусдыг ойлгох
чадвар (9)
 Эвлэрүүлэн зуучлах чадвар
(7.1)
 Өөрийгөө таних
чадвар (7.1)	Ө өрийгөө хянах чадвар (7.9)

Өөрийгөө үнэлэх чадвар (7.9)
Өөртөө
итгэлтэй байх чадвар (6.7)
Өөртөө урам зориг өгөх чадвар (7.5)
Эерэг хандах чадвар (8.3)
 Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх чадвар
(7.9) Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө
илэрхийлэх чадвар (4.2)
 Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг (8.8)
 Тэсвэр
Хатуужилтай байх чадвар (5.4)
Хувийн харилцааны оюуны чадамж	Дотоод сэтгэлгээний оюуны чадамж
Тайлангийн нарийвчилсан дүн шинжилгээ
Үр дүнг уншихын өмнө хэд хэдэн зүйлсийг анхаарах шаардлагатай.Үүнд:
-	зарим нэг хувийн зан чанарууд өөр хоорондоо зөрчилдөж болзошгүй бөгөөд энэ нь үнэн бодит байдал юм.
-	Өөрийгөө үнэлэх санал асуулгыг ашиглахдаа ажил горилогч эсвэл ажилтантай холбоотой өвөрмөц онцлогийг анхаарахгүй орхиж болохгүй.
-	Энэхүү тайлангийн “Тайлбар” хэсгээс илүү нарийвчилсан тодорхойлолтыг үзэхийг зөвлөж байна.
Давуу тал 
3 - ТАЙЛБАР
Дотоод сэтгэлгээний оюуны чадамж
Энэ нь хувь хүн өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөлөө бүрэн ойлгож, үр дүнтэйгээр зохицуулахад шаардлагатай нэн чухал хүчин зүйлүүдийг илэрхийлдэг.
Өөрийгөө таних чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Өөрийгөө таних чадвар” гэдэг нь өөрийн сэтгэл хөдлөл, хэрэгцээ, хүсэл тэмүүллээ таньж ойлгох байдлыг хэлнэ. Энэ нь тухайн хүн юу мэдэрч байгаа, мөн өөрт нь юу хамгийн сайн бэ гэдгээ тодорхой болгодог чадвар юм.
Өөрийгөө хянах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Өөрийгөө хянах” гэдэг нь саруул ухаанаар тунгаан бодож, зан төлөвөө тогтвортой байлгаж, сэтгэл хөөрлөө барьж, хариу үйлдлээ зохицуулах чадвар юм. Энэ чадвар нь хэцүү нөхцөл байдалд өөрийгөө тайвшруулж, сэтгэл хөдлөлийг зан чанарт нөлөөлөхөөс урьдчилан сэргийлдэг.
Өөрийгөө үнэлэх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Өөрийгөө үнэлэх” гэдэг нь давуу тал, сул тал гэх мэт өөрийн үнэ цэнээ бодитоор үнэлэх чадвар юм. Ийм ур чадвартай хүн өөрийгөө хэн гэдгийг бодитоор харж, давуу талаа хөгжүүлж, сул талаа байгаагаар нь хүлээн зөвшөөрч, бусдын шүүмжлэлд автдаггүй.
Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх” гэдэг нь өөртөө болон өөрийн ур чадвартаа хүчтэй итгэх чадвар юм. Өөртөө итгэлтэй хүмүүс өөртөө эргэлздэггүй, бусад хүмүүс итгэхгүй байсан ч тэд өөрийн ур чадвар, үзэл бодолдоо бат итгэдэг.
Өөртөө урам зориг өгөх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Өөртөө урам зориг өгөх чадвар” гэдэг нь зорилгодоо хүртэл хөндлөнгийн дэмжлэг урамшуулалд тулгуурлалгүй, өөрийгөө удирдан жолоодох чадвар юм. Идэвхтэй, эерэг байх нь бусдын нөлөөнд авталгүй бие даан урагшлах хамгийн гол хандлага юм.
Эерэг хандах чадвар



Тодорхойлолт
“Эерэг хандах чадвар” гэдэг нь тулгарсан асуудал, бэрхшээлийг эерэг хандлага, эерэг сэтгэлгээгээр боловсруулах, асуудлыг шийдвэрлэх хамгийн боломжит хувилбарт анхаарлаа хандуулах чадвар юм. Эерэг хандлагатай хүмүүс боломжийг шүүрэн авч, ямар ч хэцүү нөхцөлийг хамгийн сайнаар шийдвэрлэж чаддаг.
Тэсвэр хатуужилтай байх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Тэсвэр хатуужилтай байх чадвар” гэдэг нь аливаа бүтэлгүйтэл азгүйтлийн дараа хөл дээрээ хурдан босож чадах чадвар юм. Ийм чадвартай хүмүүс аливаа бүтэлгүйтлээс болж санааширч цаг алдалгүй, алдсан алдаанаасаа суралцдаг.
Бусдын үзэл бодолд уян хатан ханддаг
Тодорхойлолт
“Уян хатан байх чадвар” гэдэг нь шинэ дүрэм журам, хэм хэмжээ, нөхцөл байдалд зохицохын тулд бусдын үзэл бодол, сэтгэл хөдлөлд дасан зохицох чадвар юм. Шинэ, танил бус орчинд дасан зохицохын тулд нэгэнт бий болсон хэв маяг, зуршлаа өөрчлөх үед энэ ур чадвар бий болдог.
Хувийн харилцааны оюуны чадамж
Энэ нь хувь хүний бусадтай үр дүнтэй харилцах, ойлголцох чадварыг илэрхийлдэг сэтгэл хөдлөлийн хүчин зүйлс юм. Энэ бүлэгт агуулагдах хүчин зүйлсийг дор жагсаасан болно.
Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэх” гэдэг нь үгээр болон үгэн бус аргаар өөрийнхөө юу мэдэрч байгааг чөлөөтэй илэрхийлэх чадвар юм. Энэ ур чадварыг эзэмшсэн хүн өөрийн таньдаг хүмүүст сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлдэг ба энэ нь аливаа асуудал бэрхшээлийг бусдын зөвлөгөө тусламжтайгаар даван туулахад тусалдаг.
Өөрийн үзэл бодолд тууштай байх чадвар



Тодорхойлолт
“Тууштай байх чадвар” гэдэг нь түрэмгийлэн дайралгүйгээр өөрийн хэлэх гэснээ хэлж бусдад өөрийгөө сонсгох чадвар юм. Тууштай хүмүүс олны дунд өөрийн байр сууриа хялбар олж бусдад өөрийн санаа бодлоо ойлгуулж чаддаг. Ямар нэг зөрчил үүсэхэд тэд хойш суун бууж өгдөггүй. Ийм учраас хэт шаргуу зантай хүмүүсийг заримдаа хийрхүү, омогтой гэж харах нь ч бий.
Бусдыг ойлгохчадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Бусдыг ойлгох чадвар” гэдэг нь бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөл болон хариу үйлдлийг тодорхойлж, ойлгох чадвар юм. Бусдыг ойлгох чадвартай хүмүүс бусад хүн сэтгэл санаагаа ямар байгааг дэлгэрэнгүй тайлбарлаагүй байсан ч түүнийг нь мэдрэх чадвартай байдаг. Бусдыг ойлгодог хүмүүс бусдын сэтгэл санааны байдлыг ойлгож, тэднийг өөрт тааламжтайгаар сэтгэл хөдлөлөө илэрхийлэх боломжийг олгон бусдад зохицох чадвартай байдаг.
Ухаалаг эв дүйтэй байх чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Ухаалаг, эв дүйтэй байх” гэдэг нь бусдын мэдрэмж, үзэл бодол, байр суурийг бодолцох явцдаа өөрийн үзэл бодлоо боловсон аргаар илэрхийлэх ур чадвар юм. Ухаалаг эв дүйтэй хүмүүс өөрийн санаа бодлоо уран үгээр дүрслэн илэрхийлэх чадвартай ба бусдын сэтгэл хөдлөлд мэдрэмжтэй ханддаг.
Ялгаатай байдалд зохицох чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Ялгаатай байдалд зохицох чадвар” гэдэг нь бусдын ялгаатай байдлыг таньж мэдэх, хүлээн зөвшөөрөх, хүлээж авах чадвар юм. Энэ ур чадварыг сайн эзэмшсэн хүмүүс орчин тойрноосоо үргэлж давуу талуудыг олж харж бас үнэлж чаддаг. Ийм ур чадвартай хүмүүс өөр өөр нөхцөл байдалтай, өөр өөр ажиллах хэв маягтай хүмүүстэй хамтарч ажиллахдаа таатай бас бүтээмж өндөртэй ажилладаг.
Бусдад урам зориг өгөх чадвар



Тодорхойлолт
“Бусдад урам зориг өгөх чадвар” гэдэг нь бусдыг зорилгодоо хүрэхэд чиглэсэн үйл явцыг дэмжих, урамшуулах чадвар юм. Ийм ур чадвартай хүмүүс эерэг уур амьсгалыг бий болгож юу хүмүүсийг урам зоригтойгоор зорилгодоо хүрэхэд нь чиглүүлж болох талаар тунгаан боддог.
Эвлэрүүлэн зуучлах чадвар
Тодорхойлолт
“Эвлэрүүлэн зуучлах чадвар” гэдэг нь зөрчил маргааны үеэр зөрчлийн гол шалтгааныг олж талуудыг эвлэрүүлэх чадвар юм. Ийм ур чадвартай хүмүүс нөхцөл байдлыг бодитоор харж, зөрчилдөж буй талуудыг эвлэрүүлэх оновчтой үгийг олж хэлж чаддаг.
4 - ЕРӨНХИЙ ТОДОРХОЙЛОЛТ
Сэтгэл хөдлөлийн үзүүлэлт
1	Дасан зохицох чадвар	86%
2	Манлайлах чадвар	83%
3	Өөрийгөө ойлгох чадвар	79%
4	Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх чадвар	75%
5	Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар	72%
Дасан зохицох чадвар
Нийгмийн болон ажил мэргэжлийн харилцаа, холбоо бий болгох, орчиндоо таарч зохицоход энэ чадвар гол үндэс болдог. Дасан зохицох чадвар өндөртэй байна гэдэг нь өөрийн сурсан, дадсан зүйлсээсээ татгалзах, хандлагаа хялбархан өөрчилж чадахыг хэлдэг. Ийм чадвар өндөртэй хүмүүс тухайн нөхцөл байдал, янз бүрийн үзэл бодлыг харгалзан үздэг ч, тэр дунд өөрийн үзэл бодлыг илэрхийлэхдээ сайн байдаг. Нөгөө талаас өөрийн үзэл бодол, сурсан зангаа өөрчилж чаддаггүй хүмүүсийг хахир хатуу гэж үздэг.
Манлайлах чадвар
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь хүмүүсийг ямар нэг ажил эсвэл нэг зорилгод нэгтгэх чадварыг илтгэдэг. Урам зоригийг нь бадраахын тулд манлайлагч нь багийн гишүүдийнхээ хандлага, санаа бодлыг тодорхойлж чаддаг байх ёстой. Бусдыг ойлгох чадвар бол хүмүүст эерэг, зөвөөр нөлөөлөх, зөрчилдөөнийг шийдвэрлэхэд нэн чухал чадвар юм. Манлайлагчид бусдыг анхааралтай сонсдог, ажигч, хурц ухаантай байх ёстой.
Өөрийгөө ойлгох чадвар
Энэ хэмжүүр нь өөрийгөө сайн мэдэх, ойлгох, хүлээн зөвшөөрөх чадварыг илэрхийлнэ. Үүнийг тухайн хүн өөрийгөө хэн бэ, юу мэдэрдэг, тухайн нөхцөлд хэрхэн хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэх вэ зэргийг ухамсарлах чадвараар илэрхийлдэг. Өөрийгөө мэдэх, өөрийгөө таних, өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадварууд өндөр хөгжсөн хүмүүс давуу болон сул талаа мэддэг, өөрсдийн чадамжид итгэдэг, сэтгэл хөдлөлөө хянаж чаддаг, өөрийн амьдралаа хянах, зөв үед өөрчлөлт хийж чаддаг хүмүүс байдаг.
Өөрийгөө хөгжүүлэх чадвар
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь тухайн хувь хүн өөрийгөө болон орчин тойрноо хэрхэн ойлгож, хүлээж авч, мэдлэгийг түгээж байгааг харуулдаг. Хувь хүний хөгжлийн үзүүлэлт нь хүн өөрийгөө хэн гэж харж байгаа, ирээдүйнхээ талаар хэр өөдрөг төсөөлөлтэй байгаагаас эхэлдэг. Энэхүү танин мэдэх хандлага нь хүн цаашид өөрийнхөө үнэлэмжийг нэмэгдүүлж, харилцаа холбоогоо сайжруулахад чухал нөлөө үзүүлдэг. Мөн уналт, бүтэлгүйтлийг бэрхшээл гэж харахын оронд энэ бол дараагийн том алхам хийх, өндөр амжилтад хүргэх, суралцах үе гэж үздэг.
Өөртөө итгэлтэй байх чадвар
Энэхүү үзүүлэлтэд хүн нийгмийн амьдралдаа, ажил мэргэжилдээ биеэ дайчлан амжилт руу тэмүүлэхэд нөлөөлдөг хэд хэдэн хүчин зүйлсийг хамруулан ойлгодог. Хүн өөрийн ур чадвар, нөөц боломжууддаа итгэх нь шийдвэр гаргах, бэрхшээлтэй нүүр тулах чадварыг эрс нэмэгдүүлдэг. Бас бусадтай харилцахад ч сайнаар нөлөөлдөг. Итгэл төгс хүмүүс өөрийн санаа бодлыг илэрхийлж бусдад ойлгуулан, өөрийн зорилгодоо хүмүүсийг нэгтгэж чаддаг.



ТАЙЛАН
Шалтгаант холбоо хамаарлыг тогтоох оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээ
АГУУЛГА
1.	ОНОО
2.	ЕРӨНХИЙ ТАНИЛЦУУЛГА
3.	ҮНДСЭН ГРАФИК
4.	ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ДҮН


















Central Test-ийн тусгайлан боловсруулсан Шалтгаант холбоо хамаарлыг
тогтоох оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээ үнэлгээ болон Central Test-ийн лого нь ОУ-ын оюуны өмчийн эрхээр хамгаалагдсан болно. Тиймээс Central Test бичгээр зөвшөөрөл олгоогүй тохиолдолд тус үнэлгээг хуулбарлах, өөрчлөх, засварлахыг хориглоно.
Central Test - Empowering Talent ©2024 Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.
1 - ОНОО
42 асуултаас 26 асуултанд зөв хариулсан байна. Дундаж оноо 6.4/10
2 - ЕРӨНХИЙ ТАНИЛЦУУЛГА
“Юу хийхээ мэдэхгүй байх үедээ ашигладаг чадварыг оюуны чадамж гэнэ”
- Jean Piaget
Хүний оюуны чадамж сэтгэл зүйн болон зан авирын шинжлэх ухааны талбарт (хамгийн их маргаантай байдаг) хамгийн их судлагдсан ойлголтын нэг юм. Сэтгэхүйн янз бүрийн чадвар нь он цагийн уртад нэлээд маргаантай асуудал болоод байна. Оюуны чадамжийг янз бүрийн практик зорилго (хичээлийн амжилт, карьерын боломж, ажлын байрны таарамж гэх мэт)-оор тодорхойлж үнэлэхэд зориулагдсан олон төрлийн хандлага нэвтэрсээр байна.
Хамгийн тохиромжтой, хүлээн зөвшөөрч болохуйц практик тодорхойлолтоор бол оюуны чадамж нь шалтгаант холбоо хамаарлыг тогтоох, төлөвлөх, асуудлыг шийдвэрлэх, хийсвэрлэн бодох, шинэ санаа болон хэлний учрыг ойлгох, суралцах зэрэг олон төрлийн чадварыг хамруулсан ойлголт юм. Оюуны чадамжийг тодорхойлох хэд хэдэн арга байдаг боловч хамгийн их хэрэглэгддэг нь тооны, хэл ярианы, логик сэтгэлгээний хүчин зүйлсийг агуулсан олон талт ойлголт гэж тодорхойлогддог.
N=Тооны чадамж
V= Хэл ярианы чадамж
L= Логик сэтгэлгээний чадамж G=Ерөнхий оюуны чадамж
1-	Тооны чадамж нь математиктай хамааралтай материал (диаграм, тоо)-ыг үнэн зөвөөр бодох чадварыг харуулна.
2-	Хэл ярианы чадамж нь хэл яриаг ойлгох, үгээр илэрхийлэх хэллэгийг хялбархнаар хөрвүүлэн ойлгох чадварыг харуулна.

3-	Логик сэтгэлгээний чадамж нь янз бүрийн элементүүдийн хоорондын холбоос, түүнчлэн их, бага бүлэг дэх харилцааг холбоог илрүүлэх чадвартай холбоосыг тодорхойлох чадварыг харуулна.
Туслах хүчин зүйлс гэгддэг эдгээр хүчин зүйл нь ерөнхий болон гол хүчин зүйлээс үүссэн бөгөөд Оюуны чадамжийн итгэлцүүрийг тодорхойлох ерөнхий хүчин зүйл болдог. Энэ нь хүний шалтгаант холбоо хамаарлыг тогтоох, янз бүрийн нөхцөлд өөрийн үзэл бодлоор дасан зохицох чадварын талаар ерөнхий дүгнэлтийг өгнө.
Энэхүү үндсэн хүчин зүйл (ерөнхий оюуны чадамж) нь ихэнх оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээний нийтлэг хүчин зүйл болдог. Харин оноо нь тухайн хүний гадаад орчинд тохиромжтой аргаар хариу үйлдэл үзүүлэх болон ойлгох чадварыг таамаглах зорилгоор их сургуулийн болон бизнесийн хэрэгцээнд өргөн хэрэглэгддэг.
Оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээний түүх, хүн амын дундах тархалт
Анх оюуны чадамжийн үнэлгээг (20-р зууны эхээр) авч эхлэхдээ үнэлэх хэрэгсэл болгон ашиглах гол зорилго нь шалтгаант холбоо хамаарлыг тогтоох чадваргүй байгаа хувь хүний согогийг олж илрүүлэхэд, тухайлбал Бинет-Симоны үнэлгээний зорилго хүүхдүүдийн суралцах чадваргүй эсэхийг тодорхойлоход хэрэглэгдэж байсан. Харин, аажмаар энэ нь хүмүүсийн оюуны чадамжийн дундаж эсвэл түүнээс дээш түвшинг тодорхойлоход анхаарсан судалгаанд чиглэх болсон.
Хүмүүсийг математикийн болон статистикийн үнэлгээний нарийвчлалаар дунджаас гарсан зөрүүгээр хооронд нь ялгах шаардлага нь аажимдаа найдвартай, үр дүнтэй сэтгэл судлалын үнэлгээний хэрэгслийг хөгжүүлэхэд чиглүүлсэн. Бинетийн (20-р зууны оюуны чадамжийн сорилыг үндэслэгч) олон тооны бодит судалгаагаар оюун ухааны чадамж нь хүмүүсийн дунд хэвийн тархалтын дагуу түгэн дэлгэрснийг дүгнэсэн юм.
Судалгаа нь үнэлгээнээс авсан оноог өмнө нь загвар маягаар үнэлгээ өгсөн нэлээд тооны хүмүүсийн авсан оноотой харьцуулах боломжтой болохыг харуулсан. Үнэлгээний оноо ерөнхийдөө дунджаар 100 орчим байх ба хүн амын тал нь 100-аас дээш, үлдсэн хагас нь 100-аас доош оноо авдаг. Стандарт зөрөө нь 15 байхад хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх ба хүн амын 99.86% нь 55-145 хооронд байдаг. (M+3SD/ Дундаж+3Стандарт зөрөө/ нь 99.86% -тай адил байхад хэвийн байх магадлалтай)
Доорх хонх хэлбэртэй муруйгаар дийлэнх хүмүүсийн авдаг 85-115 оноо (68% орчим), цөөн тооны хүмүүс түүнээс бага (69-с бага), цөөн тооны хүн илүү өндөр оноо (130-с дээш) авдгийг харуулж байна.

Таны Оюуны чадамжийн оноог хэрхэн тооцох вэ?
Энэхүү үнэлгээ нь олон мянган хүмүүсийн дунд явуулсан статистикийн баталгаажилтын судалгаанд хамаарагддаг. Бид үнэлгээний гурван хүчин зүйл (Тооны, Хэл ярианы, Логик сэтгэлгээний)-ийн оноо дунджаар 5-тай, стандарт зөрөө нь 1,5 -тай ойр байх нь хэвийн байгааг харуулна.
Таны оюуны чадамж гурван хүчин зүйлтэй холбоотой цэвэр оноогоор тооцогдоно. Юуны түрүүнд логик сэтгэлгээ, хэл ярианы болон тооны хүчин зүйл тус бүрийн цэвэр оноог 1-10 хүртэлх дундаж оноотой тэнцэх 1 оноонд шилжүүлнэ. Тэгээд, бүгд дундаж оноог доорхи томьёоны дагуу 15 стандарт зөрөөгөөр 100 оноонд хөрвүүлнэ.
Оюуны чадамж = (Хүн Х-Хүн ам Х)/(Хүн амын СЗ)*15+100
Хүн X= Гурван хэмжээснээс үнэлгээнд хамрагдагчийн авсан дундаж оноо Хүн ам X= Гурван хэмжээснээс хүн амын авсан дундаж оноо
Хүн ам СЗ= Хүн амын онооны стандарт зөрөө
Дундаж оноог тооцоход энэ үнэлгээний Логик сэтгэлгээ, Хэл ярианы болон Тооны хүчин зүйл тус бүрд тэнцүү хувь эзэлнэ.
Логик сэтгэлгээ, Хэл ярианы болон Тооны чадамжийн оноо (1-10 хүртэлх хэмжээнд) өгөгдсөн хариултаас шалтгаална (хүчин зүйл тус бүрийн онцгойлсон асуултаас).
Хэл ярианы чадамж (5.3)











Логик сэтгэлгээний чадамж (4.7)
Тооны чадамж (9.2)
4 - ДЭЛГЭРЭНГҮЙ ҮР ДҮН
Тодорхойлолт
Хүн цаг тутам янз бүрийн элементүүдийн хоорондох холбоог илрүүлж байдаг ба логик сэтгэлгээний арга хэрэгсэл ашиглагддаг гэсэн үг. Энэ нь ерөнхийлөх чадвартай ихээхэн хамааралтай чадвар. Мэргэжлийн талбарт олон тооны үйл ажиллагаа нь логик сэтгэлгээний чадамж дээр тулгуурладаг. Мэдээллийн технологи, хууль, эрүүл мэндийн талбар хүний логик сэтгэлгээний нөөцөд тулгуурладаг.
Тодорхойлолт
Оюуны чадамжийн тооны хүчин зүйл нь тоотой амжилттай, үнэн зөв харьцах чадвартайг харуулж байна. Бодит амьдрал дээр тооны ур чадвар нь эдийн засаг, санхүү, нягтлан бодох, худалдааны хэлэлцээр, тоон өгөгдлийн шинжилгээ, түүнчлэн цээжээр тооцоолох зэрэг олон ажил мэргэжилд хэрэглэгддэг.
Тодорхойлолт
Хэл ярианы чадамж нь хэл ярианы нарийн учрыг ойлгох, харилцахад бэрхшээл учирдаггүй чадварыг үнэлдэг. Хэл ярианы чадамжийн хүчин зүйлийг хэрэглэдэг нөхцөл байдал нь тайлангийн төсөл боловсруулах, худалдааны танилцуулга хийх, олон нийтийн өмнө үг хэлэх, үгийн тоглоом тоглох гэх мэтээр хэрэглэгдэх ба хоорондоо ялгаатай.
Бидний ертөнцөд бичигдсэн үг, хэл өдөр тутмын амьдралд маань чухал байр суурь эзэлж, биднийг орчин тойронд болон өөрсдөдөө хувь нэмрээ оруулдаг мэдээллийг ойлгох, боловсруулах чадварыг олгодог. Түүнчлэн, аман харилцаа нь мэдлэгийг шилжүүлэх хэв маяг хэлбэр болдог. Мөн үр дүнтэй харилцах нь эцэстээ өнөөдрийн дэлхий ертөнцөд амьдрах, оршин байх чухал хүчин зүйл болдог.


ТАЙЛАН
Ажлын байран дахь ёс зүйг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ


 






















АГУУЛГА
1.	УДИРТГАЛ	3
2.	ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ	4
3.	ГРАФИК	6
4.	ТАЙЛБАР, ЗӨВЛӨМЖ	11




















Central Test-ийн тусгайлан боловсруулсан Ажлын байран дах ёс зүйн хэм хэмжээг тодорхойлох үнэлгээ болон Central Test-ийн лого нь ОУ-ын оюуны өмчийн эрхээр хамгаалагдсан болно. Тиймээс Central Test бичгээр зөвшөөрөл олгоогүй тохиолдолд тус үнэлгээг хуулбарлах, өөрчлөх, засварлахыг хориглоно.
Central Test - Empowering Talent © 2024 Бүх эрх хуулиар хамгаалагдсан.
1 – УДИРТГАЛ
Ёс зүйн үнэлгээ нь ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх төрөл бүрийн зан төлөвт хувь хүний гаргаж буй хандлагыг хэмжих зориулалттай.
Энэхүү тайлан нь ажлын ёс зүйтэй холбоо бүхий хэмжигдэхүүнийг хувь хүн хэрхэн хүндэлж буй талаарх мэдээлэл хүргэнэ. Тухайн хүний ажлын байран дахь сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвийг хүлцэх, тийм зан төлөв гаргах магадлалыг тогтооход энэхүү мэдээллийг ашиглаж болно.
Дараах тайланд, хувь хүн өөрийн зан төлөвт гаргах хандлага (“Өөртөө” тал) ба бусдын зан төлөвт гаргах хандлагад (“Бусад” тал) оноо өгсөн болно.
-	“Бусад” хэсэг дээрх оноог тухайн хүн бусдын ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвийг хүлцэх магадлалыг тооцоход ашиглаж болно. Өндөр оноо авсан бол эерэг байна. Тухайн хүчин зүйлийг өндөр түвшинд хүндэлдэг, тиймээс үүнийг үл тоож буй бусад хүнийг зөвтгөхгүй байх хандлагыг илтгэнэ.
-	“Өөртөө” хэсэг дээрх оноог тухайн хүний өөрийн зан авирыг хүлцэх, ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргах магадлалыг тооцоход ашиглаж болно. Өндөр оноо авсан бол эерэг байна. Тухайн хүчин зүйлийг өндөр түвшинд хүндэлдэг, тиймээс түүнийг хүндлэх хандлагатайг илтгэнэ.
Өөрөөр хэлбэл, хоёр талын оноог бусад хүмүүс ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргахыг тухайн хүн хүлцэх магадлал болон өөрийн сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвийг зөвтгөх магадлалын ялгааг тогтооход ашиглаж болно.
Анхааруулга:
Тус тайлан нь албан байгууллагад үр ашиггүйд тооцогдох зан төлөвт хувь хүний гаргах хандлагын талаарх мэдээлэл олгоно. Мөн тухайн хүний ажлын байрнаас гадуурх ёс зүйн талаар ямар нэгэн мэдээлэл агуулахгүй бөгөөд хэн нэгний ёс суртахуун эсвэл үнэт зүйлийг буруушаах хэрэгсэл болгон ашиглахад зориулагдаагүй болно.

Мөн хандлага хувьсан өөрчлөгдөж болох учир ёс зүйн үнэлгээг бүтээмжтэй замаар ашиглавал зохино. Ажил горилогч болон ажилтнууд байгууллагын соёл, зан төлөвийн хүлээлтэд илүү зохицоход хөгжүүлэх хэрэгтэй хандлага болон итгэл үнэмшлийг илрүүлэн тодорхойлох үндэс болгон тус тайланг ашиглаж болно.

Энэхүү үнэлгээний тайлангийн үр дүнд няхуур хандаж, үнэлгээний мэргэжилтэнтэй зөвлөлдөж тайлбар авах хэрэгтэйг анхаарна уу.
2 – ШАЛГУУР ҮЗҮҮЛЭЛТ
Олон нийтэд таалагдах байдал
Олон нийтэд таалагдах гэсэн хандлага: Бусдад (7.8 / 10) Олон нийтэд таалагдах гэсэн хандлага: Өөртөө (7.1 / 10)
Тодорхойлолт
“Олон нийтэд таалагдах байдал”-ын оноо нь тухайн хүн асуултад өөрийгөө бодитой дүгнэх байдлаар хариулсан эсэхийг хянана.
‘Олон нийтэд таалагдах гэсэн хандлага’ нь өөрийн ‘үнэн’ хариултаас илүү нийгэмд хүлээн зөвшөөрөгдөх, бусдад таалагдах хариултыг сонгох байдлыг илэрхийлнэ.
Олон нийтэд таалагдах гэсэн хандлага хэсэгт 5-аас 10 хүртэлх өндөр оноо авсан бол: Бусад талд, тухайн хүн бусдын зан төлөвт гаргадаг хандлагаа мэдүүлэхдээ тааламжтай байдлаар хариулах гэж оролдсоныг илтгэнэ. Энэ нь Бусад талд багтсан хэсгүүдэд тухайн хүний өгсөн хариултын үнэн зөв байдлыг бууруулж магадгүй.
Олон нийтэд таалагдах гэсэн хандлага хэсэгт 5-аас 10 хүртэлх өндөр оноо авсан бол: Хувь талд, тухайн хүн өөрийн зан төлөвийг мэдүүлэхдээ тааламжтай байдлаар хариулах гэж оролдсоныг илтгэнэ. Энэ нь Хувь талд багтсан хэсгүүдэд тухайн хүний өгсөн хариултын үнэн зөв байдлыг бууруулж магадгүй.
Тус үзүүлэлтийн нийт хүн амын дундаж оноо 11/20 байдаг. Үүнээс өндөр оноо нь тухайн хүн олон нийтэд таалагдах гэж хариулсан байж болзошгүйг илтгэх бөгөөд хэмжигдэхүүний үнэн зөв байдлыг байдлыг бууруулж магадгүй.
Ёс зүйн хэм хэмжээг тодорхойлох ерөнхий оноо
Тодорхойлолт
Энэ үзүүлэлт нь тухайн хүний ажлын байран дээрх ёс зүйн мэдээлэл олгоно. Үүнийг ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргах ерөнхий магадлалыг тооцоолоход ашиглана. Ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвт “Хулгай, дээрэм, авилга, ажлын байрны дээрэлхэл, залилан, ажлыг санаатайгаар тасалдуулах” гэх зэрэг үзүүлэлтүүдийг авч үзнэ.
Өндөр оноо бүхий (8-аас дээш) хувь хүн ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргах магадлал тун бага бөгөөд бага оноо бүхий (4-өөс доош) хувь хүн ажлын байран дээр сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөвт илүү хүлцэнгүй хандах магадлалтай. Тодруулбал, бага оноо бүхий хүмүүс сөрөг нөлөө үзүүлэх зан төлөв гаргах эсвэл тэвчиж дуугүй өнгөрүүлэх магадлал өндөр байна.
Тус үзүүлэлтийг няхуур ашиглаж, хүчин зүйл бүрийн нарийвчилсан оноо, тайлбарт анхаарал хандуулна уу.
 
3 – ГРАФИК
10
4 – ТАЙЛБАР, ЗӨВЛӨМЖ
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүний байгууллагын ашиг сонирхлыг хамгаалахад чиглэсэн дүрэм журмыг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг хэмжинэ. Энэ нь авилгач зан авирыг хүлцэх түвшинг тогтоох, ашиг олохын төлөө дүрэм журмыг өөрөөр тайлбарлах, гажуудуулах, зөрчих явдлыг эсэргүүцсэнээр ажлын ашигтай орчинд хувь нэмрээ оруулах магадлалтай хүнийг илрүүлж, тодорхойлох зорилготой.
Хөгжүүлбэл зохих тал:
Та бусдыг хууль, дүрэм журмыг чанга мөрдөх зан төлөвтэй байх ёстой гэж үздэг боловч өөрөө арай сул дагаж мөрдөх зан төлөвтэй. Бусад хүмүүст тавьдаг өндөр шаардлагаа үргэлжлүүлэн тавих хэрэгтэй ба тэрхүү өндөр шаардлагыг өөртөө ч бас тавихаар хичээх хэрэгтэй. Ингэснээрээ бусдад сайн үлгэр дуурайлал болно.
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүний ажлын байранд бусдыг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг хэмжинэ. Энэ нь дээрэлхэх, доромжлох явдлыг хүлцэхэд хүргэж мэдэх ажлын байран дээрх зохисгүй, гутаан доромжилсон зан авирыг хүлээн зөвшөөрөх түвшинг тогтоох зорилготой. Мөн бусадтай эелдэг боловсон харилцах замаар ажлын байранд соёлтой, хүндэтгэлтэй орчин бий болгох, түүнийг хадгалах чадвартай хүнийг илрүүлж, тодорхойлох зорилготой.




Хөгжүүлбэл зохих тал:
Та ажил дээрээ бусдыг хүндэлдэг хүмүүст эерэг хандлагатай ханддаг боловч өөрөө бусдыг хүндлэх тал дээрээ муу байгаа нь багийн тав тухтай байдалд хор хөнөөлтэй. Хүмүүсийн бусдыг хүндлэх тал дээр нь тавьдаг шаардлагаа сайжруулахын хажуугаар өөртөө тавих шаардлагаа мөн адил сайжруулахаар хичээх хэрэгтэй. Ингэснээр эрүүл, сайн харилцаатай баг байхын тулд бусдыг хүндлэх нь чухал гэдгийг өөрийн зан төлөвөөрөө харуулж чадна. Өөрийн зөн төлөвтөө тавих шаардлагаа нэмэгдүүлж, бусдыг дээрэлхэх үйлдлээ зөвтгөхөө больсноор үр өгөөжтэй, харилцан нэг нэгнээ хүндэлсэн ажлын орчинг бий болоход тус болохоос гадна хамтран ажиллагсадтайгаа харилцах харилцаагаа сайжруулж чадна.
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тухайн хүний эрх тэгш байдлыг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг хэмжинэ. Энэ нь ажилчид гадна үзэмж, бэлгийн чиг хандлагаасаа хамааран өөр өөр үүрэг даалгавар хүлээх зэрэг тохиолдолд, ажлын байранд ялгаварлан гадуурхах явдлыг хүлцэх түвшинг хэмжих зорилготой. Бусдын ондоо талыг хүлээн зөвшөөрч, хүндэлж, үнэлдэг, тиймээс тэгш оролцоотой ажлын орчинд хувь нэмрээ оруулах чадвартай хүнийг илрүүлж, тодорхойлно.
Хөгжүүлбэл зохих тал:
Та өөрийн болон бусдын эрх тэгш байдалд хандах аль аль хандлагад өндөр хүндэтгэлтэй ханддаг. Гэсэн хэдий ч Та ажил дээрх ялгаатай болон хүртээмжтэй байдлыг хүндэтгэх явдлын илүү сайжруулах үүднээс өөртөө болон бусдад тавих шаардлагаа сайжруулах хэрэгтэй.
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь хувь хүний үүрэг хариуцлагаа ухамсарлах хандлагыг хэмжинэ. Энэ нь
ажилдаа тууштай хандахгүй байгаа хүмүүсийн зан авирыг хүлцэх түвшинг үнэлэхэд чиглэгдсэн. Ажилдаа цагтаа ирэх, ажилдаа ирээгүй тохиолдолд ажлын чанар, ажил үүргийн хуваарилалтад санаа зовох, өөрийн хийсэн үйлдэлд хариуцлага хүлээж чадах зэргээр ажлаа хариуцлагатай, найдвартай хийх хүнийг илрүүлэх, тодорхойлох зорилготой.



Хөгжүүлбэл зохих тал:
Та үүрэг хариуцлагаа биелүүлэх тал дээр маш сайн хандлагатай ч бусдад тавих шаардлага султай байна. Өөртөө тавьдаг өндөр шаардлагаа үргэлжлүүлэн тавих хэрэгтэй ба тэрхүү өндөр шаардлагыг бусдад ч бас тавьж сурах хэрэгтэй. Цалин үнэлэмж бага байлаа гээд үүрэг хариуцлагаа биелүүлэхгүй байгаа нь ямар ч нөхцөл байдалд байсан зөвтгөх зүйл биш гэдгийг тэрээр харуулж чадна. Ингэснээр илүү үр өгөөжтэй, итгэлтэй ажлын орчинг бий болгоход хувь нэмрээ оруулж чадна.
 
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь байгууллагын эд хөрөнгө, өмчийг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг хэмжинэ. Энэ нь тухайн хүний жижиг хулгайг хүлцэх түвшинг тодорхойлж, ямар ч нөхцөл байдалд, өөрийн болон байгууллагын өмчийн хоорондох хил хязгаарыг хүндэтгэдэг хүмүүсийг илрүүлэн, тодорхойлох зорилготой.
Хөгжүүлбэл зохих тал:
Та өөрөө компаний бараа, эд хөрөнгийг хүндэтгэх тал дээр маш эерэг хандлагатай бөгөөд бусдыг ч адил байхыг шаарддаг. Та ямар нэгэн хулгайн үйлдлийг цаашид ч хүлээн зөвшөөрөхгүйгээр бусдад сайн үлгэр дуурайлал болж компанийхаа хөрөнгийг байнга хүндэтгэх хэрэгтэй гэдгийг уриалж байх хэрэгтэй.
Энэ хүчин зүйл нь тоо баримт, үнэнч шударга байдлыг хүндэтгэх хандлагыг хэмжинэ. Энэ нь мэдээлэл гуйвуулах явдал, хуурмаг зальжин үйлдлийг хүлцэх түвшинг тодорхойлох зорилготой. Мөн бүхий л төрлийн булхай залиас татгалздаг, харилцан итгэлцэл дээр тулгуурласан шударга ажлын харилцааг хадгалах чадвартай хүнийг илрүүлэн тодорхойлох зорилготой.
Хөгжүүлбэл зохих тал:
Та үнэнч, шударга байдлыг эрхэмлэх тал дээр өөртөө болон бусдад тавих шаардлага сайтай. Гэвч та үнэнч шударга байдлыг эрхэмлэх тал дээр бусдад хандах эерэг хандлагаа улам бүр сайжруулж ямар ч мэдээллийг гуйвуулах үйлдлүүд зүгээр өнгөрдөггүй, зөвтгөгдөхгүй гэдгийг харуулах хэрэгтэй. Та өөртөө болон бусдад тавих шаардлагаа өндөрсгөж итгэлцэл бүхий ажлын орчныг бий болгоход хувь нэмрээ оруулж чадна.






















